
BOSTOTSI 

PUBLIC 

tlBRARY 







•*s^ 



-•=5?^^. ■/- 



C^.*. 




..fe 



t ,/m»^ 



:Ar' 



J 



THE 

HISTORY 

O F 

ENGLAND, 

FROM THE 

INVASION OF JULIUS CiESAR 

T O 

The REVOLUTION m 1688. 
In EIGHT VOLUMES, illuftrated with Plates. 



By DAVID HUME, .Efq. 



A NEW EDITION, with the Author's laft 
Corrections and Improvements. 

To which is prefixed, 
A ftiort ACCOUNT of his LIFE, written by HImfelf. 

VOL. V. 



LONDON: 

Printed for T. Cadell: 

And fold by T. Cadell jun. and W. D A v i e s, 

(Succeflbrs to Mr. Cadell,) in the Strand; 

and T. N. Longman, Paternofter-Row. 

MDCCXCVII. 



CONTENTS 

OF THE 

FIFTH VOLUME, 



CHAP, xxxvin. 

ELIZABETH. 

Queen's popularity Re-eftablifhment of the proteftant 

religion A parliament Peace with France 

Difguft between the queen and Mary queen of Scots 
— ■ Scots affairs — Reformation in Scotland 

Civil wars in Scotland Interpofal of the queen in 

Scots affairs Settlement of Scotland French 

affairs Arrival of Mary in Scotland Bigotry of 

the Scotch Reformers Wife Government of Eliza- 
beth. Page I 

CHAP. XXXIX. 

State of Europe Civil wars of France Havre de 

Grace put in poffeffion of the Englifti A parliament 

Havre loft Affairs of Scotland The queen 

of Scots marries the earl of Darnley Confederacy 

againft the proteftants Murder of Rizzio A par- 
liament Murder of Darnley Queen of Scots 

marries Bothwel Infurredtions in Scotland Im- 

prifonment of Mary Mary flies into England • 

Conference at York and Hampton Court. 64 

CHAP. 



CONTENTS. 



CHAP. XL. 

Charadler of the puritans Duke of Norfolk's confpi-* 

racy Infurredlion in the north AfTaflination of 

the earl of Murray A parhament Civil wars of 

France Affairs of the Low Countries—^ — New con- 

fpiracy of the duke of Norfolk ^Trial of Norfolk 

His execution Scotch affairs French affairs 

Maflacre of Paris French affairs Civil wars of 

the Low Countries A parliament. Page 149 



CHAP, XLL 

Affairs of Scotland Spanifh affairs Sir Francis 

Drake A parliament Negotiations of marriage 

with the duke of Anjou Affairs of Scotland 

Letter of queen Mary to Elizabeth Confpiracies in 

England A parliament ;The ecclefiadical com- 

miffion Affairs of the Low Countries Hoflilities 

with Spain. 230 

CHAP. XLIL 

Zeal of the catholics Babington's confplracy Mary 

affents to the confpiracy The confpirators feifed 

and executed Refolution to try the queen of Scots 

The commifTioners prevail on her to fubmit to the 

trial The trial Sentence againfl Mary In- 

terpofition of king James Reafons for the execution 

of Mary The execution Mary's characSter— • 

The queen's affedled forrow Drake deflroys the 

Spanifh fleet at Cadiz Philip proje<Sl:s the invafion 

of England The invincible armada Preparations 

in Ensrland ^The armada arrives in the channel • 

Defeated A parliament— —Expedition againll Por- 
tugal—Affairs of Scotland. 283 

CHAP. 



CONTENTS. 



CHAP. XLIIL 

French affairs Murder of the duke of Gulfe— — Mur- 
der of Henry III. Progiefsof Htnry IV. Naval 

enterprifes againft Spain A parliament Henry 

IV. embraces the catholic religion Scotch affairs— — 

Naval enterprifes A parliament Peace of Ver- 

Vins— — The earl of Effex, Page 354 

CHAP. XLIV. 

State of Ireland— — Tyrone's rebellion — — -Eflex fent over 

to Ireland His ill fuccefs Returns to England 

Is difgraced His intrigues— — His infurre£lion 

■ His trial and execution— — French affairs 

Mountjoy's fuccefs in Ireland Defeat of the Spaniards 

and Irifh A parliament Tyrone's fubmifhon 

Queen's ficknefs — and death—and character 395 



APPENDIX III. 

Government of England — —Revenues Commerce- 
Military force — -Manufa6tures Learning. 45 j 



THE 



;*• 




rublijfudm Htf^ct JutcUhvT. CadM . SOruui rtb'tj^iie . 



m 



THE 

I S T O R Y 



O F 



ENGLAND. 



ELIZABETH, 

C II A l\ XXXVIII, 

Recti's popularity- — — Re-ejiahlifoment of the pre- 

teftant religion A parliamen t ' Peace with 

France-' Difguji between the ^een and Mary 

queen of Scots Affairs of Scotland Reform^ 

ation in Scotland—^ Civil wars in Scotland ■ 

Interpofal of the S^uecn in the affairs of Scot- 
land Settlement of Scotland French affairs 

Arrival of Mary in Scotland Bigotry of 

the Scotch reformers Wife government of FAi- 

zabeth. 

N a nation fo divided as the Englifli, it could c H A P« 
fcarcely be expefted that the death of one fove- ^^^^^^^' 
reign, and the acceffion of another, who wasgene- ,^55 
rally beheved to have embraced oppofite principles 
to thofe which prevailed, could be the objeftof uni- 
verfal fatisfaQion : Yet fo much were men difpleafed 

Vol. V. B with 



2 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP. With the prefent conduft of affairs, and fuch appre- 
XXXVIII. henfions were entertained of futurity, that the peo- 
1558. P'^^' overlooking their theological difputes, expreffed 
Quern's ^ general and unfeigned joy that the fceptre had 
popularity, paiTed into the hand of Elizabeth. That princefs 
had difcovered great prudence in her condudl during 
the reign of her filter ; and as men were fenfible of 
the imminent danger to which (lie was every moment 
expofed, compaffion towards her fituation, and con- 
cern for her fafety, had rendered her, to an uncom- 
mon degree, the favourite of the nation. A parlia- 
ment had been affembled a few days before Mary's- 
death ; and when Heathe, archbifliop of York, then 
chancellor, notified to them that event, fcarcely an 
interval of regret appeared ; and the two houfes im- 
mediately refounded with the joyful acclamations of 
*' God fave queen Elizabeth ; Long and happily 
" may Ihe reign !" The people, lefs actuated by fac-, 
tion, and lefs influenced by private views, expreffed 
a joy flill more general and hearty on her proclama- 
tion ; and the aufpicious commencement of this reign 
prognofticated that felicity and glory which, during 
its whole courfe, fo uniformly attended it". 

Elizabeth was at Hatfield v/hen fhe heard of her 
fifter's death ; and, after a few days, fhe went thence 
to London through crowds of people, who ftrove 
with each other in giving her the ftrongeft teflimony 
of their affection. On her entrance into the Tower, 
fhe could not forbear reflecting on the great differ- 
ence between her prefent fortune, and that which a 
few years before had attended her, when fhe was 
conduded to that place as a prifoner, and lay there 
expofed to ail the bigotted malignity of her enemies. 
She fell on her knees, and expreffed her thanks to 
Heaven for the deliverance which the Almighty had 
granted her from her bloody perfecutors -, a deliver- 
ance, fhe faid, no lefs miraculous than that which 

y » Burnet, vol. li. p. 373. 

Daniel 



ELIZABETH. 3 

Daniel had received from the den of lions. This ^J?xvm 
ad: of pious gratitude feems to have been the lad v^^-v-*^ 
circumflance in which flie remembered any paft 1558. 
hardlhips and injuries. With a prudence and mag- 
nanimity truly laudable, flie buried all offences in 
oblivion, and received with affability even thofe who 
had afted with the greateft malevolence againft her* 
Sir Harry Bennifield himfelf, to whofe cultody flie 
had been committed, and who had treated her with 
feverity, never felt, during the whole courfe of her 
reign, any effefts of her refentment ''. Yet was not 
the gracious reception which fhe gave proilitute 
and undiflinguifhing. When the bifhops came in a 
body to make their obeifance to her, (he exprefled 
to all of them fentiments of regard ; except to Bon- 
ner, from whom fhe turned afide, as from a man 
polluted with blood, who was a juft obje*5l of horrot 
to every heart fufceptible of humanity ^ 

After employing a few days in ordering her do* 
medic affairs, Elizabeth notified to foreign courts, 
her filler's death, and her own acceffion. She fent 
lord Cobham to the Low Countries, where Philip 
then refided ; and flie took care to exprefs to that 
monarch, her gratitude for the protection which he 
had afforded her, and her defire of perfevering in 
that friendfliip which had fo happily commenced 
betw^een them. Philip, who had long forefeen this 
event, and who flill hoped, by means of Elizabeth, 
to obtain that dominion over England, of which he 
had failed in efpoufmg Mary, immediately difpatched 
orders to the duke of Feria, his ambaffador at Lon- 
don, to make propofals of marriage to the queen ; 
and he offered to procure from Rome a difpenfation 
for that purpofe. But Elizabeth foon came to the 
refolution of declining the propofal. She law that 
the nation had entertained an extreme averfion to the 
Spaniffi alliance during her filter's reign 5 and that 

'» J^urnet, vol. ii. p. 374-. * Ibid, Ileylin, p. 102. 

B 2 one 



4 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, one great caufe of the popularity which fhe herfelt 
^^^^.^^^..^ enjoyed, was the profpedl of being freed, by her 
J558. means, from the danger of foreign fubjeclion. She, 
tvas fenfible that her affinity with Philip was ex- 
aftly fimilar to that of her father with Catharine of 
Arragon ; and that her marrying that monarch was, 
in effed, declaring herfelf illegitimate, aiid incapable 
of fucceeding to the throne. And, though the 
power of the Spanifh monarchy might ftill be fuffi- 
cient, in oppofition to all pretenders, to fupport her 
title, her mafculine ipirit difdained fuch precarious 
dominion, which, as it v^ould depend folely on the 
power of another, mull be exercifed according to 
his inclinations ''. But, while thefe views prevented 
her from entertaining any thoughts of a marriage 
with Philip, flic gave him an obliging, though 
evafive, anfwer ; and he ftill retained luch hopes 
of fuccefs, that he fent a meilenger to Rome, with 
orders to folicit the difpenfation. 

The queen too, on her lifter's death, had written 
to fir Edward Carne, the Engliili ambalTador at 
Rome, to notify her accellion to the pope ; but the 
precipitate nature of Paul broke through all the 
cautious meafures concerted by this young princefs. 
He told Carne, that England was a fief of the holy 
fee ; and it was great temerity in Elizabeth to have 
rdmmed, without his participation, the title and au- 
thority of queen : That being illegitimate, fhe could 
not poflibly inherit that kingdom ; nor could he 
annul the fentence pronounced by Clement VIL 
and Paul III. with regard to Henry's marriage ; 
That were he to proceed with rigour, he fhould 
punifh this criminal invafion of his rights by re- 
jefting all her applications ; but, being willing to 
treat her with paternal indulgence, he would ftill 
keep the door of grace open to her : And that, if 
Ihe would renounce all pretenfions to the crown, 

* Camden in Kennel, p. 370, Burnet, vol, ii. p. 375. 

and 




ELIZABETH. 

and fubmit entirely to his will, flie fhould expe- 
rience the utmoft lenity compatible with the dignity 
t>f the apoftolic fee ^ When this anfwer was re- ^1558 
ported to Elizabeth, fhe v/as aftonifhed at the cha- 
racter of that aged pontiff ; and, having recalled her 
ambaffador, fhe continued with more determined 
refolution to purfue thofe meafures which already 
•ihe had fecretly embraced. 

The queen, not to alarm the partifans of the ca- 
tholic religion, had retained eleven of her fifter's 
counfellors ; but in order to balance their authority, 
ihe added eight more, who were known to be in- 
clined to the proteftant communion : the marquis Re-efta- 
of Northampton, the earl of Bedford, nr Thomas ^^I'^^ment 
Parry, fir EdvvT^rd Rogers, fir Ambrofe Cave, fir teftant rl°' 
Francis Knolles, fir Nicholas Bacon, whom {kQ I'gion. 
created 'lord keeper, and fir Vvoiliam Cecil, fecre- 
tary of ftate ^ With thefe counfellors, particularly 
Cecil, fne frequently deliberated concerning the ex- 
pediency of reitoring the protellant religion, and the 
means of executing that great enter prife. Cecil ^ 

told her, that the greater piirt of the nation had, 
ever fince her father's reign, inclined to the re- 
formation ; and, though her fifter had conftrained 
them to profefs the ancient faith, the cruelties ex- 
crcifed by her minifters had fiill more alienated their 
affections from it : That happily the interefts of the 
fovereign here concurred with the inclinations of the 
people ; nor was her title to the crown compatible 
with the authority of the Roman pontiif : That a 
fentence, fo folemnly pronounced by two popes 
againft her mother's marriage, could not poffibly be 
recalled, without infli6ling a mortal wound on the 
credit of the fee of Rome ; and even, if fhe were 
allowed to retain the crown, it would only be on an 
uncertrjn and dependent footing : That this circum- 
ilance alone counterbalanced all dangers whatfoever ; 

< Father Pan), lib. 5, ^ Strype's Ann. vol, i, p. 5. 

B 3 and 



6 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, and thefe dangers themfelves, if narrowly examined, 
\,^„~...^^.^^ would be found very little formidable : That the 
1558, curfes and execrations of the Romilh church, when 
not feconded by military force, were, in the prefent 
age, more an objeft ot ridicule than of terror, and 
had now as little influence in this world as in the 
next : That though the bigotry or ambition of 
Henry or Philip might incline them to execute a 
fentence of excommunication againft her, their in- 
terefts were fo incompatible, that they never could 
concur in any plan of operations ; and the enmity of 
the one would always enfure to her the friendfliip 
of the other : That if they encouraged the difcon- 
tents of her catholic fubjects, their dominions alfo 
abounded with proteflants, and it would be eafy to 
retaliate upon them : That even fuch of the Englifh 
as feemed at prefent zealoufly attached to the ca- 
tholic faith, would, mofl of them, embrace the re- 
ligion of their new fovereign ; and the nation had 
of late been fo much accuflomed to thefe revolu- 
tions, that men had lofl all idea of truth and falfe- 
hood in fuch fubjeds : That the authority of Henry 
VIIL fo highly raifed by many concurring circum- 
ftances, lirli enured the people to this fubmiffive 
deference ; ^^and it was the lefs difficult for fucceeding 
princes to continue the nation in a track to which it 
had fo long been accuflomed : And that it would 
be eafy for her, by bellowing on proteftants all pre- 
ferment in civil offices and the militia, the church, 
and the univerlities, both to enfure her own au- 
thority, and to render her religion entirely pre- 
dominant ^, 

The education of Elizabeth, as well as her in- 
tereft, led her to favour the reformation ; and fhe 
remained not long in fufpcnce with regard to the 
party which fhe fhould embrace. But, though de- 
termined in her ov/n mind, Hie refolved to proceed 



t Euinet, vol. ii. p. 377. Camden, p. 37C3. 



by 



ELIZABETH. j 

by 8;radiml and fecure fteps, and not to imitate the C H A ?. 

• . • XXXVlii 

example of Mary, in encouraging the bigots of her s,^^^.,,^,.^ 
party to make immediately .i violent invafion on the iss'^- 
cftablifhed religion \ She thought it requifite, how- 
ever, to difcover fuch fymptonis of her intentions, 
as might give encouragement to the proteftants, fo 
much deprelTed by the late viplent perfecutions. She 
immediately recalled all the exiles, and gave liberty 
to the prifoners who were confined on account of 
religion. We are told of a pleafantry of one Rains- 
ford on this occafion, who faid to the queen, that 
he had a petition to prefent her^ in behalf of other 
prifoners called Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John : 
She readily replied, that it behoved her firfl to con- 
fult the prifoners themfelves, and to learn of them 
whether they defired that liberty which he demanded 
for them *. 

Elizabeth alfo proceeded to exert, in favour of 
the reformers, fome afts of power which were au- 
thorifed by the extent of royal prerogative during 
that age. Finding that the proteftant teachers, irri- 
tated by perfecution, broke out in a furious attack 
on the ancient fuperftition, and that the Romanifts 
replied with no lefs zeal and acrimony, fhe publifhed 
a proclamation, by which Ihe inhibited all preaching 
without a fpecial licence "" ; and though fhe difpenfed 
with thefe orders in favour of fome preachers o^ her 
own feci, fhe took care that they fhould be the mofl 
calm and moderate of the party. She alfo fufpended 
the laws fo far as to order a great part of the fervice, 
the litany, the Lord's prayer, the creed, and the 
gofpels, to be read in Englifh. And, having firfl 
publifhed injunftions that all the churches Ihould 
conform themfelves to the praftice of her own cha- 
pel, fhe forbad the hofle to be any more elevated 
in her prefence ; an innovation which, however 

Ji Burnet, vol. ii. p. 378. Camden, p. 571. i Heylin, p. 103. 

^ Heylin, p. 104.. birype, vol. i. p. 41. 

B 4 frivolous 



8 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, frivolous it may appear, implied the mod material 

XXXVIII. J, 7 rr ' r 

K.^^.-y.-^j conlequences . 

Z558. These declarations of her intentions, concurring 
with preceding fufpicions, made the bifhops forefee, 
with certainty, a rcvrlution in religion. They there- 
fore refufed to officiate at her coronation ; and it 
was with fome difficulty that the biiliop of Carlifie 
was at lail prevailed on to perform the ceremony. 
"When (he was conduced through London, amidfl 
the joyful acclamations of her fubjecls, a boy, who 
perfonated Truth, was let down from one of the 
triumphal arches, and prefented to her a copy of the 
Bible. She received the book with the moft gra- 
cious deportment, placed it next her bofom, and de- 
clared, that, amidll all the coftiy teftimonies which 
the city had that day given her of their attachment, 
this prefent was by far the moft precious and moft 
acceptable'". Such were the innocent artifices by 
which Elizabeth infinuated herfelf into the affections 
of her fubjects. Open in her addrefs, gracious and 
affable in all public appearances, die rejoiced in the 
concourfe of her fubjefts, entered into all their plea- 
fures and amufements, and, v^/ithout departing from 
her dignity, which fhe knew well how to preferve, 
fhe acquired a popularity beyond what any of her 
predeceffors or fucceffors ever could attain. Her own 
fex exulted to fee a woman hold the reins of empire 
with fuch prudence and fortitude: And while a young 
princefs of twenty-five years (for that was her age 
at her acceffion), who poffeffed all the graces and in- 
fmuation, though not all the beauty of her fex, court- 
ed the aft'eftions of individuals by her civilities, of 
the public by her feryices, her authority, though cor- 
roborated by the ftricleft bands of law and religion, 
appeared to be derived entirely from the choice and 
inclination of the people. ♦ 

^ CamJePj p. 371. Keylin, p. 104. Str5'pe, vol. i. p. 54. Stowe, 
p. 635, "" Bmnet, vol, ii, p. 380. Strype, vol. i. p. 29. 

A SOVE- 



E I. I Z A B E T H. 9 

A SOVEREIGN of this dlfpofition was not likely to ^ ^^ ^ P* 
oiTend her fubicfts by any ufelels or violent exer- ^l,,^.^^,,^ 
tions of power; and FJizabcfth, though (he threw 1558. 
out fuch hints as encouraged the proteflants, de- 
layed the entire change of religion till the meeting 
of the parliament, which was fummoned to aflemble. 
The elections had gone entirely againft the catlio- A pirlia« 
lies, who feejn not indeed to have made any great ' 
ftruggie for the fuperioriuy " ; and the houies met, 
in a difpofition of gratifying the queen in every 
particular which flie could defire of them. They 
began the fellion with an unanimous declaration, 
" tha: Queen Elizabeth was, and ought to be, as 
" w^U by the word of God, as the common and 
*' ftatute laws of tlie realm, the lav/ful, undoubted, 
" and true heir to the crown, lav>^fullv defcended 
" from the blood-rovai, according- to the order of 
'" fucceilion fettled in the 35th of Henry Vlil. * " 
This aft of recogiiition was probably dilated bv 
the queen herfelf and her miniiters ; and die ihewed 
her magnanimity, as v/ell as moderation, in the 
terms which ihe employed on that occafion. She 
followed not Mary's praftice in declaring the vali- 
dity of her niother's marriage, or in exprefsly re- 
pealing the acf formerly made againfl her own le- 
gitimacy : She knew that this attempt mufl be 
attended v/ith refleCLions on her father's memory, 
and on the birth of her deceafed fifter ; and as all 
the world was fenfibk', that Henry's divorce from 
Anne Boleyn was merely the eflecl of his ufual 
vioknce and caprice, ihe fcorned to found her title 
on any act of an aiTembly which had too much 
proflituted its authority by its former variable, fer- 

" Notwithftanding the bias of tlie nation towartls the proteflant feft, 
h appeals, that loiiie violence, at !ealt accoi^iing to our prelt-nt ideas, 
was uTed in thef.- eledions : Five canditiates were nomina;ed by the 
court to each borough and three to each county j and by the fheriff's 
authority, the members were chofei* from among thele candidates. 
^eefate papetz coL'eacd hy Edivard earl of Qarendtn , p. 93. 

» I tliZt cap. 3. 

15 ^ vile. 



lo HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

c H A P. vile, and iniquitous decifions. Satisfied therefore 
^^^^^\1^ in the general ophiion entertained with regard to 
,55s. this fact, which appeared the more undoubted, the 
lefs anxiety fhe difcovered in fortifying it by votes 
and enquiries ; fhe took poifeffion of the throne, 
both as her birthright, and as enfured to her by for- 
mer ads of parliament ; and fhe never appeared 
anxious to diftinguifli thefe titles ''. 

The firfl bill brought into parliament, with a 
view of trying their difpohtion on the head of reli- 
gion, was that for fuppreffing the monafteries lately 
erefted, and for reiloring the tenths and ilrfi-fruits 
to the queen. This point being gained with much 
difficulty, a bill was next introduced, annexing the 
fupremacy to the crown; and though, the queen 
was there denominated gover?icfs, not head, of the 
church, it conveyed the fame extenfive power, 
which, under the latter title, had been exercifed by 
her father and brother. All the bifiiops who were 
prefent in the upper houfe (trenuoufly oppofed this 
law ; and as they poiTeifed more learning than the 
temporal peers, they triumphed in the debate ; but 
the majority of voices in that houfe, as well as 
among the commons, was againft them. By this 
acf the crown, without the concurrence either of the 
parliament or even of the convocation, was veiled 
with the v/hole fpiritual power ; might reprefs all 
herefies, might ellablifli or repeal all canons, might 
alter every point of difciphne, and might ordain or 
aboliili any rehgious rite or ceremony '*. In deter- 
mining herefy, the fovereign was only limited (if 
that could be called a hmitation) to fuch doftrines 
-as had been adjudged herefy by the authority ot tlie 
Scripture, by the firft four general councils, or by 
any general council which followed the Scripture as 
their rule, or to fuch other doctrines as fhould here- 

P Crimden, p. 372. Ileylin, p. 107, 108. 

'i I Kliz. c:ii). I. This l;ilt powir was anew recognized in the aSi ' 
cf Tniiiiiiiiity, i Eliz. cap. a. 

after 



ELIZABETH. ir 

after be denominated herefy by the parliament and chap. 
convocation. In order to exercile this authority, ^^..^^^.^^ 
the queen, by a claufe of the aft, was empowered 1558. 
to name commifiioners, either laymen or clergy- 
men, as fne fliould think proper; and on this claufe 
was afterwards founded the court of ecclefiaftical 
commiflion ; which affumed large difcretionary, not 
to fay arbitrary powers, totally incompatible with 
any exaft boundaries in the conltitution. Their 
proceedings indeed were only confiftent with abfo- 
lute monarchy ; but v/ere entirely fuitable to the 
genius of the aft on which they were ejftabliflied ; an 
aft that at once gave the crown alone all the power 
which had formerly been claimed by the popes, but 
which even thefe ufurping prelates had never been 
able fully to exercife, without fome concurrence of 
the national clergy. 

Whoever refufed to take an oath, acknowlede- 
mg the queen's fupremacy, was incapacitated from 
holding any office ; whoever denied the luprcraacy, 
or attempted to deprive the queen of that preroga- 
tive, forfeited, for the firft offence, all his goods 
and chattels ; for the fecond, was fubjefted to the 
penalty of a premunire ; but the third ottence was 
declared trealon. Thefe punifhments, however fc- 
vere, were lefs rigorous than thofe which were for- 
merly, during the reigns of her father and brother, 
inflifted in hke cafes. 

A LAW was paffed, confirming all the flatutes 
enafted in king Edward's time with regard to reli- 
gion ' : The nomination of bifhops was given to the 
crown without any eleftion of the chapters : The 
queen was empowered, on the vacancy of any fee, 
to feize all the temporalities, and to bellow on the 
bilhop eleft an equivalent in the impropriations be- 
longing to the crown. This pretended equivalent 
was commonly much inferior in value j and thus the 

' J Elir. cap, 2, 

5 queen. 



12 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

^.^A T' queen, amidft all her conosrn for religion, ibllowed 
the example of the preceding reformer?, in com- 
:s8. mitting depredations on the ecclefiafdcal revenues. 
The bifhcps and all incurAbents were pro- 
hibited from alienating their revenues, and from 
letting leafes longer than twenty-one vears or three 
lives. This law fecmcd to be meant for fecuring 
the property of the ciiurcii ; but as an exception wa.i 
left in favour of the crown, great abufcs ftill prevail- 
ed. It was ufual for the courtiers during this reigii 
to make an agreement with a bifhop or' incumbent, 
and to procure a fiftitious alienation to the queen, 
who afterwards transferred the lands to the per Ton 
agreed on '. This method of pillaging the church 
was not remedied till the beginning cf James I. 
The Drefent depreffion of the clergy expofed thera 
to ail injuries ; and the laity 'never ilopped till they 
had reduced the church to'fuch pcvertv, that her 
plunder was no longer a compenfation for the odium 
incurred by it. 

A SOLEMN and public difputation was held during 
this feffion, in prefence of lord keeper Bacon, be- 
tween the divines of the proteftant and thofe of the 
catholic communion. The champions, appointed 
to defend the rehgion of the fovereign, were, as in 
all former inftances, entirely triumphant ; and the 
popifn difputants, being pronounced rcfraftory and 
obfiinare, were even punilhed by imprifonraent '. 
Emboldened by this viccory, the proteftants ven-' 
tured on the lajft and moft important flep, and 
brought into parliament a bill" for abolifiiing the 
mafs, and re-eflablifhing the liturgy of king Ed- 
ward. Penalties were enacfed, as well againft thofe 
who departed from this mode of worfnip, as againft 
thofe who abfented themfelves from the church and 
the facraments. And thus in one feilion, without any 
violence, tumult, or clamour, was the whole fyfteni 
of religion altered, on the very commencement of a 

» Stiype, vol. i. p. 79. » Ibio'. p. 95. »» 1 Eliz. cap.^i. 

reign, 



ELIZABETH. ij 

feign, and by the will of a young woman, whofe CHAP, 
title to the crown was by many thought liable to v.^.^-v--^ 
great objedlons : An event which, though it may 1558. 
appear furprifmg to men in the piefent age, was 
every where expecled on the iirlt intelligence of 
EHzabeth's acceffion. 

The commons alfo made a facrifice to the queen, 
more difficult to obtain than that of any articles of 
faith : They voted a fubfidy of four (hillings in the 
pound on land, and two fliillings and eight pence on 
moveables, together with two fifteenths ''. The houfe 
in no inftance departed from the moft relpedful de- 
ference and complaifance tovv^ards the queen. Even 
the importunate addrefs which they made her on the 
conclulion of the feffion, to fix her choice of a huf- 
band, could not, they fuppofed, be very difagreeablc 
to one of her fex and age. I'lie addrefs was couched 
in the moft refpeftful exprefiions ; yet met with a 
refufal from the queen. She told the fpeaker, that, 
as the application from the houfe was conceived in 
general terms, only recommending marriage, with- 
<Hit pretending to uireft her choice of a hufoand, flie 
could not take offence at the addrefs, or regard it 
otherwife than as a new inftiance of their aft'ectionate 
attachment to her : That any farther interpofition 
on their part would have ill become either them to 
make as fubjecls, or her to bear as an independent 
princefs : That even while (lie was a private perfon, 
and expofed to much danger, (lie had always declined 
that engagement, which Ihe regarded as an incum- 
brance ; much more, at prefent, would ihe perfevere 
in this fentiment, when the charge of a great king- 
dom was committed to her, and her life ought to be 
entirely devoted to promoting the interefts of religion 
and the happinefs of her fubjecls : That as England 
was her hufband, v^^edded to her by this pledge (and 
here (he fhewed her finger with the fame gold ring 

'^ See note [A] at the enc! of the yolgme. 

upon 



14 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, upon it, -with which (he had folemnlv betrothed her- 
y^^^_^^,„^ felf to the kingdom at her inauguration), fo all Eng- 
4559. lifhmen were her children ; and while fhe was em- 
ployed in rearing or governing fuch a family, fhe 
could not deem herfelf barren, or her life ufelefs and 
unprofitable : That if fhe ever entertained thoughts 
of changing her condition, the care of her fubjecls 
welfare would (till be uppermoft in her thoughts ; 
but ihould file live and die a virgin, fhe doubted not 
but divine Providence, feconded by their counfels 
and her own meafures, would be able to prevent all 
difpute with regard to the fuccellion, and fecure them 
a fovereign, who, perhaps better than her own iflue, 
would imitate her example in loving and cherifhing 
her people : And that, for her part, fhe defired that 
no higher charafter or fairer remembrance of her 
fhould be tranfmitted to pofterity, than to have this 
infcriptlon engraved on her tomb-llone, when fhe 
fhould pay the laft debt to nature : " Here lies Eli- 
" zabeth, who lived and died a maiden queen ""." 
8th May. After the prorogation of the parliament^, the 
laws enacted with regard to religion were put in ex- 
ecution, and met with little oppofition from any 
quarter. The liturgy was again introduced in the 
vulgar tongue, and the oath of fupremacy was ten- 
dered to the clergy. The number of bifhops had 
been reduced to fourteen by a fickly feafon, which 
preceded ; and all thefe, except the bifliop of Lan- 
daffe, having refufed comphance, were degraded 
from their fees : But of the inferior clergy through- 
out all England, where there are near 1 0,000 parifhes, 
only eighty 'reclors and vicars, fifty prebendaries, 
fifteen heads of colleges, twelve archdeacons, and as 

* Camden, p. 375. Sir Simon d'Ewes. 

y It is tliought rtmarkalile by Cairnien, that though this ftfiloti was 
the fiilt of the reign, no jierlon was attainted j but, on the contrary^ 
fonie rtrtored in blood by tlie parliament; A good lymptom of the 
Jeniry, at leaft of the prudence, of the queen's government; and that 
it (liould appear reinaikable, is a proof of the rigour of preceding 
reigns. 

many 



ELIZABETH. 15 

many deans, facrificed their livings to their religious Chap. 
principles"'. Thofe in high ecclefiaflic flations, v»,„-v-,»J 
being expofed to the eyes of the public, feem chiefly 1559. 
to have placed a point of honour in their perfe- 
verance ; but on the w^hole, the proteflants, in the 
former change introduced by Mary, appear to have 
been much more rigid and confcientious. Though 
the catholic religion, adapting itfelf to the fenfes, 
and enjoining obfervances which enter into the com- 
mon train of hfe, does at prefent lay fafler hold on 
the mind than the reformed, which, being chiefly 
fpiritual, refembles more a fyftem of metaphyfics ; 
yet was the proportion of zeal, as well as of know- 
ledge, during the firft ages after the reformation, 
much greater on the fide of the proteflants. The 
catholics continued, ignorantly and fupinely, in their 
ancient belief, or rather their ancient practices: But 
the reformers, obliged to difpute on every occafion, 
and enflamed to a degree of enthufiafm by novelty 
and perfecution, had flrongly attached themfelves 
to their tenets; and were ready to facrifice their 
fortunes, and even their lives, in fupport of their 
fpeculative and abflraft principles. 

The forms and ceremonies flill preferved in the 
Englifli liturgy, as they bore fome refemblance 
to the ancient fervice, tended farther to reconcile 
the catholics to the eflablifhed religion ; and as the 
queen permitted no other mode of worfhip, and at 
the fame time ftruck out every thing that could be 
offenfive to them in the new liturgy^, even thofe 
who were addicted to the Romifh communion made 
no fcruple of attending the eftabliflied church. Had 
Elizabeth gratified her own inclinations, the exterior 
appearance, which is the chief circumftance with the 
people, would have been flill more fimilar between 
the new and the ancient form of worfhip. Her love 
of flate and magnificence, which fhe affected in every 

* Camden, p. 370. Heylin, p. 115. Strype, vol. i, p. 73. with, 
fome fmuli vauations. ^ Heylin, p. iii, 

thing, 




j6 history of ENGLAND. 

thing, infpired her with an inclination towards the 
pomp of the catholic religion ; and it was merely in 
J 55 9. compliance with the prejudices of her party, that fhe 
gave up either images or the addrelTes to faints, or 
prayers for the dead "". Some foreign princes inter- 
pofed to procure the Romanifls the privilege of fe- 
parate allemblies in particular cities, but the queen 
would not comply with their requeil: ; and fhe re- 
prefented the manifell danger of diiturbing the na- 
tional peace by ♦a toleration of different religions ". 
Peace with While the queen and parliament were employed 
France. jj^ fettling the public religion, the negotiations for a 
peace were ftiil condufted, firll: at Cercamp, then at 
Cateau-Cambrefis, between the miniders of France, 
Spain, and England ; and Elizabeth, though equally 
prudent, was not equally fuccefsful in this trinf- 
aftion. Philip employed his utmoft efforts to pro- 
cure the reilitutlon. of Calais, both as bound in ho- 
nour to indemnify England, which, merely on his 
account, had been drawn into the war, and as en- 
gaged in intereil to remove France to a diftance from 
his frontiers in the Low Countries. So long as he 
entertained hopes of efpoufmg the queen, he delayed 
concluding a peace with Henry ; and even after the 
change of religion in England deprived him of all 
fuch views, his miniilers hinted to her a propofal, 
which may be regarded as reafonable and honour- 
able. Though all his own terms with France w^ere 
fettled, he feemed willing to continu'e the w^ar till 
Ihe fhould obtain fatisfaftion ; provided fhe would 
ftipulate to adhere to the Spanifli alliance, and con- 
tinue hofiilities againft Henry during the courfe of 
. fix years ^ : But Ehzabeth, after confulting with her 
miniflers, wifely rejefted this propofal. She was 
fenfible of the low (late of her finances ; the great 
debts contracted by her father, brother, and filler ; 



^ Burnet, vol. ii. p. 376. 397. Camden, p. 37I. 
* Camden, p. 378. Strype, vol.i. p. 150. 370. 
'^ Foibcs's Full View, vol, i, p. 59. 



the 



CHAP. 
XXXVIII. 



ELIZABETH. 1? 

?he diforders introduced into every part of the ad- 
miniflration ; the divifions by which her people were 
agitated; and fhe was convinced that nothing but »ss9 
tranquillity during fome years could bring the king- 
dom again into a flourifhing condition, or enable 
her to ad with dignity and vigour in her tranfac- 
tions with foreign nations. Well acquainted with 
the value which Henry put upon Calais, and the 
impoflibility, during the prefent emergence, of re- 
covering it by treaty, fhe was willing rather to fufFer 
that lofs, than fubmit to fuch a dependence on Spain, 
as Ihe muft expeft to fall into, if fhe continued 
pertinacioufly in her prefent demand. She ordered, 
therefore, her ambaffadors, lord Effingham, the 
bifhop of Ely, and Dr. Wotton, to conclude the 
negotiation, and to fettle a peace with Henry, on ' 

any reafonable terms. Henry offered to flipulate a 
marriage between the eldeft daughter of the dau- 
phin, and the eldeft fon of Elizabeth ; and to engage 
for the reftitution of Calais as the dowry of that 
princefs ^ ; but as the queen was fenfible that this 
treaty would appear to the world a palpable evafion, 
Ihe infifted upon more equitable, at leaft more 
plaufible conditions. It was at laft agreed, that 
Henry fhould reftore Calais at the expiration of 
eight years ; that, in cafe of failure, he fhould pay 
five hundred thoufand crowns, and the queen's title 
to Calais ftill remain ; that he fhould find the fecu- 
rity of feven or eight foreign merchants, not natives 
of France, for the payment of this fum ; that he 
fhould deliver five hoftages till that fecurity were 
provided; that if Elizabeth broke the peace with 
France or Scotland during the interval, fhe fhould 
forfeit all title to Calais ; but if Henry made war 
on Elizabeth, he fhould be obliged immediately to 
reflore that fortrefs ^ All men of penetration cafily 

« Forbes, vol. i. p. 54.. 

f Forbe?, p, v'iS. Rymer, torn, xv, p. "^oj. 

Vol. V- C ' i^^ 



I* HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, faw that thefe ftipulations were but a colourable 
XXXVIII. pretence for abandoning Calais ; but they excufed 
J the queen on account of the neceflity of her affairs ; 

and they even extolled her prudence, in fubmitting, 
without farther flruggle, to that neceffity. A peace 
with Scotland Vv-as a neceifary confequence of that 
with France. 

Philip and Henry terminated hoftilities by a 
mutual reflitution of all places taken during the 
courfe of the war ; and Philip efpoufed the prin- 
cefs Elizabeth, eldeft daughter of France, formerly 
betrothed to his fon Don Carlos. The duke of 
Savoy married Margaret, Henry's filler, and ob- 
tained a reflitution of all his dominions of Savoy 
and Piedmont, except a few towns retained by 
France. And thus general tranquillity feemed to 
be reftored to Europe. 

But though peace was concluded between France 
between ^^^ England, there foon appeared a ground of 
the queen, quarrel, of the mofl ferious nature, and which was 
»iueerfo7 afterwards attended with the moft important confe- 
Scot$. quences. The two marriages of Henry VIII. that 
with Catherine of Arragon, and that with Anne 
Boleyn, were incompatible with each other ; and it 
feemed impofiible, that both of them could be re- 
garded as valid and legal : But flill the birth of 
Elizabeth lay under fome difad vantages, to which 
that of her filler, Mary, was not expofed. Henry's 
firfl marriage had obtained the fandion of all the 
powers, both civil and ecclefiailical, which were then 
acknowledged in England ; and it was natural for 
proteflants, as well as Romanifls, to allow, on ac- 
count of the fmcere intention of the parties, that 
their ilfue ought to be regarded as legitimate. But 
his divorce and fecond marriage had been concluded 
hi direct oppofition to the fee of Rome j and though 
they had been ratified by the authority both of the 
Englifh parhanient and convocation, thofe who v/ere 

ilrongly 






ELIZABETH. 19 

f^rongly attached to the catholic communion, and ^ "xvin! 
who reafoned with great ftridlnefs, were led to re- k^^,..,^^ 
gard them as entirely invalid, and to deny altogether 1559* 
the queen's right of fuccellion. The next heir of 
blood was the queen of Scots, now married to the 
dauphin ; and the great power of that princefs, 
joined to her plaufible title, rendered her a formi- 
dable rival to Elizabeth. The king of France had 
fecretly been foliciting at Rome a bull of excom- 
munication againil the queen ; and fhe had here 
been beholden to the good offices of Philip, who, 
from intered more than either friendfhip or ge- 
nerofity, had negotiated in her favour, and had fuc- 
c-efsfully oppofed the pretenfions of Henry. But 
the court of France was not difcouraged v/ith this 
repulfe: The duke of Guife, and his brothers, , 

thinking that it would much augm.ent their credit 
if their niece fhould bring an acceflion of England, 
as fhe had already done of Scotland, to the crown 
of France, engaged the king not to ^negleft the 
claim ; and, by their perfuafion, he ordered his fon 
and daughter-in-law to alTume openly the arms as; 
well as title of England, and to quarter thefe arms 
on all their equipages, furniture, and liveries. When 
the Englilli ambalTador complained of this injury, 
he could obtain nothing but an evafive anfwer; that 
as the queen of Scots was defcended from the blood 
royal of England, flie was entitled, by the example 
of many princes, to aflume the arms of that king- 
dom. But befides that this praftice had never pre- 
vailed without permiilion being fir ft obtained, and 
without making a vifible difference between the arms, 
EHzabeth plainly faw, that this pretenfion had not 
been advanced during the reign of her fifter Mary ; 
and that therefore the kinej of France intended, on 
the firft opportunity, to difpute her legitimacy, and 
her title to the crown. Alarmed at the danger, fne 
thenceforth conceived a violent jealoUfy againil thq 

C 2 queen 



20 HISTORY OF KNGLA,ND. 

CHAP, queen of Scots ; and was determined, as far as poj!^ 
y^,.^^^^^ fible, to incapacitate Henry from the execution of 
IJ59. his projeft. The fudden death of that monarch, 
who was killed in a tournament at Paris, while cele- 
brating the efpoufals of his filler with the duke of 
Savoy, altered not her views. Being informed that 
his fucceflbr, Francis 11. flill continued to aflume, 
without referve, the title of king of England, fhe 
began to confider him and his queen as her mortal 
enemies ; and the prefent fituation of affairs in Scot- 
land afforded her a favourable opportunity, both of 
revenging the injury, and providing for her own 
fafety. 
Affairs of Tke murder of the cardinal-primate at St. An- 
Scotland, ^jj-e^s had deprived the Scottifli catholics of a head, 
whofe feverity, courage, and capacity had rendered 
him extremely formidable to the innovators in reli* 
gion ; and the execution of the laws againff herefy 
began thenceforth to be more remifs. The queen- 
regent governed the kingdom by prudent and mo- 
derate counfels ; and as fhe was not difpofed to 
iaciifice the civil interelts of the Hate to the bigotry 
or intereffs of the clergy, flie deemed it more expe- 
dient to temporize, and to connive at the progrefs 
of a doctrine which die had not power entirely to 
reprei's. Vv''hen informed of the death of Edward, 
iind the acceffion of Mary to the crown of England, 
{he entertained hopes, that the Scottifli reformers, 
deprived of the countenance which they received 
from that powerful kingdom, would lofe their ar- 
dour with their profped of fuccefs, and would 
gradually return _to the faith of their anceflors. But 
the progrefs and revolutions of religion are little 
governed by the ufual maxims of civil poli<:y; and 
the event much difappointed the expe6lations of the 
regent. Many of the Enghfii preachers, terrified 
with the feverity of Mary's government, took fhelter 
in Scotland, where they found more protection, and 

n a milder 



ELIZABETH. 2i 

a milder adminiftration, and while they propaj^ated chap. 
their theological tenets, they filled the whole king- v^^^^^Iili 
dom with a juft horror againfl the cruelties of the 1559. 
bigoted catholics, and fhewed their difciples the fate 
which they mufl expeft, if ever their ad verfariesfhould 
attain an uncontrolled authority over them. 

A HIERARCHY, moderate in its acquifitions of 
power and riches, may fafely grant a toleration to 
fedaries ; and the more it foftens the zeal of inno- 
vator's by lenity and liberty, the more fecurely will 
it poflefs thole advantages which the legal eftablifh- 
ments beftow upon it. But where fuperftition has 
raifed a church to fuch an exorbitant height as that 
of Rome, perfecution is lefs the refulr. of bigotry in 
the priefls, than of a neceffary policy ; and the rio-our 
of law is the only method of repelling the attacks of 
men who, befides religious zeal, have fo many other 
motives, derived both from public and private in- 
tereft, to engage them on the fide of innovation. 
But though fuch overgrown hierarchies may long 
fupport themfelves by thefe violent expedients, the 
time comes when feverities tend only to enrage the 
new fedaries, and make them break through all 
bounds of reafon and moderation. This crifis was 
now vifibly approaching in Scotland ; and whoever 
confiders merely the tranfaftions refulting from it, 
will be inclined to throw the blame equally on both 
parties ; whoever enlarges his view, and refleds on 
the fituations, will remark the neceffary progrefs of 
human affairs, and the operation of thofe principles 
which are inherent in human nature. 

Some heads of the reformers in Scotland, fuch as Re''orm. 
the earl of Argyle, his fon lord Lome, the earls of ^'f'^"'" 
Morton and Glencarne, ErfKine of Dun, and others, ^'^*^'"''' 
obferving the danger to which they were expofed, 
and defirous to propagate their principles, entered 
privately into a bond or aifociation ; and called them- 
felves the Congregation of the Lord, in contradif- 

C 3 tinction 



22 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP. tm£lIon to the eftabliflied church, which they de-. 

^^^^..-^ nominated the congregation of Satan. The tenour 
X559. of the bond was as follows : " We perceiving how 
*' Satan, in his members, the antichrift of our time, 
*' do cruelly rage, feeking to overthrow and to de- 
" flroy the gofpel of Chriil and his congregation, 
" ought, according to our bounden duty, to drive, 
*' in our Mailer's caufe, even unto the death, being 
*' certain of the viftory in him. We do therefore 
" promife, before the majefty of God and his 
'* congregation, that we, by his grace, fhall with 
^' all diligence continually apply our whole power, 
■''■ fubflance, and our very lives, to maintain, fet 
^^ forward, and eflablifh the moft blelfed word 
" of God and his congregation ; and fhall labour, 
*' by all poiiiblc means, to have frithful minifters, 
" truly and purely to minifter Chrift's gofpel and 
*' facraments to his people : W^e fliall maintain 
*• them, nourifh them, and defend them, the whole 
*' congregation of Chrifl, and every member there- 
" of, by our whole power, and at the hazard of 
*•' our lives, againft Satan, and all wicked power, 
" who may intend tyranny and trouble againil; the 
** faid congregation : Unto which holy word and 
** congregation we do join ourfelves ; and we for- 
*' fake and renounce the congregation of Satan, 
"•^ with all the fuperflitious abomination and idolatry 
*' thereof ; and moreover fhall declare oiirfelves ma- 
*' nifeftly enemies thereto, by this faithful promife 
*^ before God, teflified to this congregation by our 
** fubfcriptions. At Edinburgh, the third of De- 
« ceniber 1557 "." 

Had the fubfcribers of this zealous league been 
content only to demand a toleration of the new opi- 
nions ; however incompatible their pretenfions might; 
have been with the policy of the church of Rome, 

g Keith, p. 66. Knox, p. loi. 

10 ther 



ELIZABETH. 2$ 

they would have had the praife of oppofmg tyrannical ^^^^ J** 
laws, enabled to fupport an eilablifliment prejudicial v-*"-^v^ 
to civil Ibciety : But it is plain that they carried their 1559- 
views much farther ; and their praftice immediately 
difcovered the fpirit by which they were actuated. 
Supported by the authority which they thought be- 
longed to them as the congregation of the Lord, 
they ordained, that prayers in the vulgar tongue ^ 
fhould be ufed in all the parifh churches of the 
kingdom j and that preaching, and the interpret- 
ation of the fcriptures, fhould be pra£lifed in 
private houfes, till God fliould move the prince 
to grant pubHc preaching by faithful and true mi- ' 

nifters '. Such bonds of alTociation are always 
the forerunners of rebellion ; and this violent in- 
vafion of the eflablifhed religion was the actual 
commencement of it. 

Before this league was publicly known or avowed, 
the clergy, alarmed with the progrefs of the reform- 
ation, attempted to recover their loft authority by a 
violent exercife of power, which tended ftill farther 
to augment the zeal and number of their enemies. 
Hamilton, the primate, feized Walter Mill, a prieft 
of an irreproachable life, who had embraced the new 
dodlrines ; and having tried him at St. Andrews, 
condemned him to the flames for herefy. Such ge- 
neral averfion was entertained againft this barbarity, 
that it was fome time before the bifhops could pre- 
vail on any one to act the part of a civil judge, and 
pronounce fentence upon Mill ; and even after the 
time of his execution was fixed, all the (hops of St. 
Andrews being fhut, no one would fell a rope to 
tie him to the ftake, and the primate himfelf was 
obliged to furnilh this implement. The man bore 
the torture with that courage which, though ufual 

^ The reformers ufed at that time king Edward's liturgy in Scot- 
land. Forbes, p. 155. * Keith, p. 66. Knox, p. xoi. 

C 4 on 



tJi HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, oil thefe occafions, always appears fupernatural and 
v!^^^ aftonifhing to the multitude. The people, to ex- 
1559. prefs their abhorrence againft the cruelty of the 
priefts, raifed a monument of jflones on the place of 
his execution ; and as fall as the ftones were re- 
jnoved by order of the clergy, they were again fup- 
plied from the voluntary zeal of the populace ". It 
is in vain for men to oppofe the fevereft punifh- 
jnent to the united motives of religion and public 
applaufe ; and this was the laft barbarity of the kind 
which the catholics had the pov/er to exercife in. 
Scotland. 

Some time after, the people difcovered their fen- 
timents in fuch a manner as was fufficient to prog- 
noflicate to the priefts the fate which was awaiting 
them. It was ufual on the feftival of St. Giles, the 
tutelar faint of Edinburgh, to carry in proceffion the 
image of that faint; but the proteftants, in order 'to 
prevent the ceremony, found means, on the eve of 
the feftival, to purloin the ftatue from the church ; 
and they pleafed themfelves with imagining the fur- 
prife and difappointment of his votaries. The 
clergy, however, framed haftily a new image, which, 
in derifion, was called by the people young St. 
Giles ; and they carried it through the ftreets, at- 
tended by all the ecclefiaftics in the town and neigh- 
bourhood. The multitude abftained from violence 
fo long as the queen-regent continued a fpeftator, 
but the moment flie retired, they invaded the idol, 
threw it in the mire, and broke it in pieces, l^he 
flight and terror of the priefts and friars, who, it 
was remarked, deferted in his greateft diftrefs the 
objeft of their worftiip, was the fource of univerfal 
mockery and laughter. 

Encouraged by all thefe appearances, the Con- 
gregation proceeded with alacrity in openly foliciting 

k Knox, p. 122, 

fubfcriptions 



ELIZABETH. ij 

fubfcriptions to their leac^us ; and the death of C ii A P. 
Mary of England, with the acceffion of EHzabeth, y,^^..,^^^^ 
which happened about this time, contributed to in- 1559. 
creafe their hopes of final fuccefs in their under- 
taking. 1 hey ventured to prefent a petition to the 
regent, craving a reformation of the church, and of 
the wicked, fcandalom, and dctejlahle lives of the 
prelates and ecclefiallics '. They framed a petition, 
which they intended to prefent to parliament, and 
in which, after premifmg that they could not com* 
municate with the damnable idolatry and intolera- 
ble abufes of the papiilical church, they defired, 
that the laws againR her.etics fhould be executed by 
the civil magillrate alone, and that the fcripture 
Ihould be the fole rule in judging of herefy *". They 
even petitioned the convocation, and infifted that, 
prayers fhould be faid in the vulgar tongue, and 
that bifhops fhould be chofen with the confent of 
the gentry of the diocefe, and priefls with the con- 
fent of the parifhioners ". The regent prudently 
temporifed between thefe parties ; and as fhe aimed, 
at procuring a matrimonial crown for her fon-in-law, 
the dauphin, fl^e was, on that as well as other ac- 
counts, unwilhng to come to extremities with either 
of them. 

But after this conceffion was obtained, fhe re- 
ceived orders from France, probably diclated by the 
violent fpirit of her brothers, to proceed with ri- 
gour againft the reformers, and to reilore the royal 
authority by fome fignal a6t of power". She made 
the more eminent of the proteflant teachers be cited 
to appear before the council at Stirling ; but when 
their followers were marching thither in great mul- 
ti.udes, in order to proteft and countenance them, 
fhe entertained apprehenfions of an infurreftion, 

J ILnox, p. 121. ^ Ibid. p. tzj. « Keith, p. 78. 81. 82. 

• Mclvil's Memoirs, p. 24.. Jebb, voJ. ii, p. 44.6, 

and. 



26 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, and, it is faid, diffipated the people by a promlfe \ 
XXXVIII. ^j^^^ nothing Ihould be done to the prejudice of the 



J555. minifters. Sentence, however, was pafled, by which 
all the minifters were pronounced rebels, on ac- 
count of their not appearing: A meafure which 
enraged the people, and made them refolve to op- 
pofe the regent*s authority by force of arms, and to 
proceed io extremiries againil the clergy of the efta- 
bliflied religion. 

In this critical time, John Knox arrived from 
Geneva, where he had palled fome years in banifh- 
ment, and where he had imbibed, from his com- 
merce with Calvin, the higheft fanaticifm of his 
fe6l, augmented by the native ferocity of his own 
iithMay. character. He had been invited back to Scotland 
by the leaders of the reformation ; and mounting 
the pulpit at Perth, during the prefent ferment of 
men's minds, he declaimed with his ufual vehe- 
mence againft the idolatry and other abominations 
of the church of RomiC, and incited his audience to 
exert their utmofl zeal for its fubverfion. A prieft 
was fo imprudent after this fermon, as to open his 
repofitory of images and reliques, and prepare him- 
felf to fay mafs. The audience, exalted to a dif- 
pofition for any furious enterprife, were as much 
enraged as if the fped:acle had not been quite fa- 
miliar to them : They attacked the prieft with 
fury, broke the images in pieces, tore the pictures, 
overthrew the altars, fcattered about the facred 
vafes ; and left no implement of idolatrous wor- 
fhip, as they termed it, entire or undefaced. They 
thence proceeded, with additional numbers and 
augmented rage, to the monafteries of the grey 
and black friars, which they pillaged in an inftant : 
The Carthufians underwent the fame fate : And the 
populace, not content with robbing and expelling 

P See note [B] at the end of the volume. 

the. 




ELIZABETH. 

the monks, vented their fury on the buildnigs which 
had been the receptacles of fiich abomination ; and 
in a little time nothing but the walls of thefe edifices 1559. 
were left (landing. The inhabitants of Couper in 
Fife foon after imitated the example''. 

The queen regent, provoked at thefe violences, f^'^'' wars 
affembled an army, and prepared to chaflife the re- ]",ij^"^" 
bels. She had about two thoufand French under 
her command, with a few Scottifli troops; and 
being alii (led by fuch of the nobility as were well 
a(fe(Sled to her, (he pitched her camp within ten 
miles of Perth. Even the earl of Argyle, and lord 
James Stucirt, prior of St. Andrews, the queen's 
natural brother, though deeply engaged with the 
reformers, attended the regent in this enterprife, 
either becaufe they blamed the fury of the populace, 
or hoped, by their own influence and authority, to 
mediate fome agreement between the parties. The 
Congregation, on the other hand, made preparations 
for defence ; and being joined by the earl of Glen- 
carne from the v/e(t, and being countenanced 
by many of the nobility and gentry, they appeared 
formidable from their numbers, as well as from 
the zeal by which they were animated. They 
fent an addrefs to the regent, where they plainly 
infmuated, that if they were purfued to extremities 
by the cruel beajis the churchmen, they would 
have recourfe to foreign powers for allift^nce ; 
and they fubfcribed themfelves her faithful fub- 
jed:s in all things not repugnant to God, aifuming, 
at the fame time, the name of the faithful con- 
gregation of Chrift Jefus'. They applied to the 
nobility attending her, and maintained that their 
own pad violences were juftified by the word of 
God, which commands the godly to deftroy idolatry, 
and all the monuments of it ; and thou oh all civil 
authority was facred, yet was there a great difference 

S Spotfwood, p. lai, Knox, p. 127. ' Knox, p. 1^9. 

between 



6C 



S8 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, between the authority and the perfons who exerclfed 
K^^^.^,^.^^ it' ; and that it ought to be confidered, whether 
1559. or not thofe abominations, called by the peftilent 
papifls. Religion, and which they defend by fire 
and fword, be the true religion of Chrift Jefus. 
They remonftrated with fuch of the queen's army 
as had formerly embraced their party, and told 
them, " That as they were already reputed traitors 
by God, they fhould likewife be excommunicated 
from their fociety, and from the participation of 
*' the facraments of the church, which God by his 
*' mighty power had erefted among them ; whofe 
" miniiters have the fame authority which Chrift 
*' granted to his apoftles in thefe words, Whofe fins 
*' ye fhall forgive fhall be forgiven, and ivhofe fins 
*' ye fhall retain flo all be retained^** We may here 
fee, that thefe new faints M'ere no lefs lofty in their 
pretenfions than the ancient hierarchy : No wonder 
they were enraged againft the latter as their rivals in 
dominion. . They joined to all thefe declarations aii 
addrefs to the eftablifhed church ; and they affixed 
this title to it: " To the generation of antichrift, 
*' the pellilent prelates and their fhavelings" in 
" Scotland, the Congregation of Chrift Jefus within 
" the fame fayeth." I'he tenour of the manifefto 
was fuitable to the title. They told the ecclefiaftics, 
" As ye by tyranny intend not only to deftroy our 
^^ bodies, but alio by the fame to hold our fouls in 
*^' bondage of the devil, fubje6: to idolatry ; fo ftiali 
" we with all the force and power which God fhall 
" grant unto us, execute juft vengeance and punifh- 
" ment upon you: Yea, we fliall begin that fame war 
" which God commanded Ifrael to execute againft 
" the Canaanites ; that is, contract of peace fhall 
" never be made till you defift from your open 
" idolatry and cruel perfecution of God's children. 

s Knox, p. i3r. ' IWid. p. 133. 

" A comemptuous term foi' a prielt. 

« And 



ELIZABETH. 40 

** And this. In the name of the eternal God, and chap. 
" of his fon Chrifl Jefus, whofe verity we profefs, v«g*-v-i»J 
" and gofpel we have preached, and holy facra- 1559. 
*' ments rightly adminiftered, we fignify unto you, 
" to be our intent, fo far as God will affifl: us to 
" withftand your idolatry. Take this for warning, 
" and be not deceived"'.'* With thefe outrageous 
fymptoms, commenced in Scotland that cant, hypo- 
crify, and fanaticifm, which long infeiled that king- 
dom, and which, though now mollified by the lenity 
of the civil power, is lUll ready to break out on all 
occafions. 

Tpi£ queen-regent, finding fuch obftlnate zeal In 
the rebels, was content to embrace the counfels of 
Argyle and the prior of St. Andrews, and to form 
an accommodation with them. She was received 
into Perth, which fubmitted, on her promifmg an 
indemnity for pad offences, and engaging not to 
leave any French garrifon In the place. Complaints, 
very ill founded, immediately arofe concerning the 
infra<5lion of this capitulation. Some of the in- 
habitants, it was pretended, were molefted on ac- 
count of the late violences ; and fome companies of 
Scotch foldiers, fuppofed to be in French pay, were 
quartered in the town ; which ftep, though taken 
on very plaufible grounds, was loudly exclaimed 
againfl by the Congregation ". It is aiferted, that the 
regent, to jullify thefe meafures, declared that princes 
ought not to have their promii'es too flridly urged 
upon them ; nor was any faith to be kept with here- 
tics; and that for her part, could fhe find as good 
a colour, flie would willingly bereave all thefe men 
of their lives and fortunes^. But it is nowife likely 
that fuch exprefhons ever dropped from this prudent 
and virtuous princefs. On the contrary, it appears, 
that all thefe violences were difagreeable to her; 

w Keith, p. ?5, 86, 87, Knox, p. 134. " Knox, p. 139, 

y Ibid. Spotfwowd. p. laj, 

that 



30 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, that fhe was In this particular over-ruled by the 

^^^^Ii"i authority of the French counfellors placed about 

J 5^, her ; and that fhe often thought, if the management 

of thofe affairs had been entrufted wholly to herfelf, 

fhe could eafily, without force, have accommodated 

all differences^. 

The Congregation, inflamed with their own zeal, 
and enraged by thefe difappointments, remained not 
long in tranquillity. Even before they left Perth, 
and while as yet they had no colour to complain of 
any violation of treaty, they had figned a new cove- 
nant, in which, befides their engagements to mutual 
defence, they vowed, in the name of God, to em- 
ploy their whole power in deflroying every thing 
that difhonoured his holy name ; and this covenant 
was fubfcribed, among others, by Argyle and the 
prior of St. Andrews •". Thefe two leaders now 
defired no better pretence for deferting the regent 
and openly joining their affociates, than the com- 
plaints, however doubtful, or rather falfe, of her 
breach of promife. The Congregation alfo, en- 
couraged by this acceffion of force, gave themfelves 
up entirely to the furious zeal of Knox, and renewed 
at Crail, Anftruther, and other places in Fife, Hke 
depredations on the churches and monafteries with 
thofe formerly committed at Perth and Couper. 
The regent, who marched againft them with her 
army, finding their power fo much increafed, was 
glad to conclude a truce for a few days, and to pais 
over with her forces to the Lothians. The reform- 
ers befieged and took Perth ; proceeded thence to 
Stirling, where they exercifed their ufual fury ; 
finding nothing able to refill them, they bent their 
march to Edinburgh, the inhabitants of which, 
as they had already anticipated the zeal of the Con- 
gregation againfl the churches and monafteries, 

"^ See note [C] at the end of the volume. 
* Keith, p- ^t;. Knox, p. 138. 

gladly 



ELIZABETH. 3, 

gladly opened their gates to them. The regent, chap. 
with a few forces which remained with her, took ^^^^!^J!^ 
fhelter in Dunbar, where flie fortified herfelf, in ex- 1559. ' 
pedation of a reinforcement from France. 

Meanwhile, flie employed her partifans in re- 
prefenting to the people the dangerous confequences 
of this open rebellion ; and ihe endeavoured to con- 
vince them, that the lord James, under pretence of 
religion, had formed the fcheme of wreiling the 
fceptre from the hands of the fovereign. By thefe 
confiderations many were engaged to defert the 
army of the Congregation ; but much more by the 
want of pay, or any means of fubfiftence ; and the 
regent obferving the malcontents to be much 
weakened, ventured to march to Edinburgh with a 
defign of fuppreffing them. On the interpofition of 
the duke of Chatelrault, who ftill adhered to her, 
ilie agreed to a capitulation, in which fhe granted 
them a toleration of their religion, and they engaged 
to commit no farther depredations on the churches. 
Soon after they evacuated the city ; and before they 
left it, they proclaimed the articles of agreement ; 
but they took care to publifli only the articles fa- 
vourable to themfelves, and they were guilty of an 
in^poflure, in adding one to the number, namely, 
that idolatry flioukl not again be eredied in any place 
where it was at that time fupprelTed ^ 

An agreement, concluded while men were in this 
difpofition, could not be durable ; and both fides 
endeavoured to ftrengthen themfelves as much as 
polTible againft the enfuing rupture, which appeared 
inevitable. The regent, having got a reinforcement 
of one thoufand men from France, began to fortify 
Leith ; and the Congregation feduced to their party 
the duke of Chatelrault, who had long appeared in- 
clined to join them, and who was at lall determined 
by the arrival of his fon, the earl of Arran, from 

'' See note [D] at the end of the volume. 

France^ 



32 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

G H A P. France, where he had efcaped many dangers, from 
^'^^Zil!; ^^^ jealoufy, as well as bigotry, of Henry and 
J3,„, the duke of Guife. More French troops foon after 
difembarked under the command of La BrolTe, who 
was followed by the bifliop of Amiens, and three 
doftors of the Sorbonne. Thefe laft were fupplied 
with ftore of fyllogifnis, authorities, citations^ and 
fcholaftic arguments, which they intended to oppofe 
to the Scoitiih preachers, and which, they juftly 
prefumed, would acquire force, and produce con- 
viction, by the influence of the French arms and' 
artillery". 

The conflable Montmorency had always oppofed' 
the marriage of the dauphin with the queen of* 
Scots, and had foretold, that by forming fuch clofe 
connexions with Scotland, the ancient league would 
be difiblved ; and the natives of that kingdom, 
jealous of a foreign yoke, would foon become, in-. 
Itead of allies attached by intereft ai"d inclination, 
the moft inveterate enemies to the French govern- 
ment. But though the event feemed now to have 
juftified the prudence of that aged miniller, it is 
not improbable, confidering the violent counfels by 
which France was governed, that the infurreftiou 
was deemed a favourable event ; as affording a pre^ 
tence for fending over armies, for entirely fubduing 
the country, for attainting the rebels % and for pre- 
paring means thence to invade England, and fub- 
port Mary's title to the crown of that kingdom. 
The leaders of the Congregation, well acquainted 
with thefe views, were not infenfible of their danger, 
and faw that their only fafety confiiled in the vigour 
and fuccefs of their meafures. They were encou- 
raged by the intelligence received of the fudden 
death of Henry IL ; and having palled an aft from 
their own authority, depriving the queen-dowager of 
the regency, and ordering all the French troops to 

= Spotfwood, p. 134.. TInnn. lib. xxiv. c. 10*. 
* Forbes, vol.i. p. 139. Thuan. lib. xxiv. c, 13 

evacuate 



ELIZABETH. 



33 



c\ticuate the kingdom, they collefted forces to put chap. 
their edi6t in execution againfl them. They again ^"^?^li^ 
became mafters of Edinburgh ; but found them- ,35^. ' 
felves unable to keep long pofleffion of that city* 
Their tumultuary armies, alTembled in hade, and 
fupported by no pay, foon feparated upon the lead 
difafter, or even any delay of fuccefs ; and were 
incapable of refilling fuch veteran troops as the 
French, who were alfo feconded by fome of the 
Scottilh nobility, among whom the earl of Bothwel 
diftinguiihed himfelf. Hearing that the marquis of 
Elbeuf, brother to the regent, was levying an army 
againft them in Germany, they thought themfelves 
excufable for applying, in this extremity, to the 
affiftance of England ; and as the fympathy of reli- 
gion, as well as regard to national liberty, had now 
counterbalanced the ancient animofity againft that 
kingdom, this meafure was the refult of inclination, 
no lefs than of intereft % Maitland of Lidington, 
therefore, and Robert Melvil, were fecretly dif- 
patched by the Congregation to folicit fuccours from 
Elizabeth* 

The wife council of Elizabeth did not long de- interpo- 
iiberate in agreeing to this requeft, which concurred ''''°" ''^ 
fo well with the views and intcrefts of their miftrefs. in Scotcti 
Cecil in particular reprefented to the queen, that the affairs, 
union of the crowns of Scotland and France, both 
of them the hereditary enemies of England, was ever 
regarded as a pernicious event ; and her father, as 
well as proteftor Somerfet, had employed every ex- 
pedient, both of war and negotiation, to prevent it : 
That the claim, which Mary advanced to the crown, 
rendered the prefent fituation of England ftill more 
dangerous, and demanded, on the part of the queen, 
the greateft vigilance and precaution: That the 
capacity, ambition, and exorbitant views of the 
family of Guife, who now governed the French 

« See note £E] at the end of tlic volume. 

Vol. V. JX counfels, 



34 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, counfels, were fufEciently known ; and they them- 
y_^„^Z!^ felves made no fecret of their defign to place their 
,559. niece on the throne of England: That, deeming 
themfelves fecure of fuccefs, they had already, fome- 
what imprudently and prematurely, taken off the 
maflv ; and Throgmorton, the Englifli ambalTador 
at Paris, fent over, by every courier, inconteftable 
proofs of their hoftile intentions ^ : That they only 
waited till Scotland fhould be entirely fubdued ; and 
having thus deprived the Englifh of the advantages 
refulting from their fituation and naval power, they 
prepared means for fubverting the queen's authority ; 
That the zealous catholics in England, difcontented 
with the prefent government, and fatisfied in the le- 
gality of Mary's title, w^ould bring them confiderable 
reinforcement, and would diflurb every meafure of 
defence againft that formidable power : That the 
only expedient for preventing thefe defigns was to- 
feize the prefent opportunity, and take advantage of 
a like zeal in the proteftants of Scotland ; nor could 
any doubt be entertained with regard to the juftice 
of a meafure, founded on fuch evident necelfity, and 
diredled only to the ends of felf-prefervation : That 
though a French war, attended with great expence, 
feemed the neceifary confequence of fupporting the 
malcontents of Scotland, that power, if removed to 
the continent, would be much lefs formidable ; and 
a fmall dilburfement at prefent would in the end be 
found the greateft frugality : And that the domeflic 
dilTenfions of France, which every day augmented, 
together v/ith the alliance of Philip, who, notwith- 
ftanding his bigotry and hypocrify, would never 
permit the entire conquell of England, were fuffi- 
cient to fecure the queen againft the dangerous am- 
bition and refentment of the houfe of Guife ^, 

f Forbes, vol. i. p. 134.. 136. 149) 150. 159. 165. 181. 194. 229, 
*3i'-35 — 2+''i53' s Forbes, vol. i, p. 387. Jebb, vol. i. p. 448. 
Keith, Append. 24. 

c Eliza- 



ELIZABETH. 35 

Elizabeth's propenfity to caution and oeconomy chap. 
was, though with fome difficulty*", overcome by thefe ,^^„_^^ 
powerful motives ; and fhe prepared herfelf to fup- 155^. 
port, by arms and money, the declining affairs of 
the Congregation in Scotland. She equipped a fleet, 
which confided of thirteen fhips of war ; and giving 
the command of it to Winter, (he fent it to the Frith 
of Forth : She appointed the young duke of Norfolk 
her lieutenant in the northern counties, and fhe af- 
fembled at Berwick an army of eight thoufand men. 
under the command of lord Grey, warden of the 
eafl and middle marches. Though the court of 
France, fenfible of the danger, offered her to make 
immediate reflitution of Calais, provided fhe would 
not interpofe in the affairs of Scotland ; fhe refo- 
lutely replied, that flie never would put an incon- 
fiderable fifliing-town in competition with the fafety 
of her dominions ' ; and fhe flill continued her pre- 
parations. She concluded a treaty of mutual de- 
fence with the Congregation, which was to lafl du- 
ring the marriage of the queen of Scots with Francis, 
and a year after ; and fhe promifed never to defift 
till the French had entirely evacuated Scotland". 
And having thus taken all proper meafures for fuc- 
cefs, and received from the Scots fix hoffages for 
the performance of articles, fhe ordered her fleet 
and army to begin their operations. 

The appearance of Elizabeth's fleet in the Frith ^.^^^1°!^^ 
difconcerted the French army, who were at that time 
ravaging the county of Fife ; and obliged them to 
make a circuit by Stirling, in order to reach Leith, 
where they prepared themfelves for defence. The 
Englifh army, reinforced by five thoufand Scots \ 
fat down before the place 5 and after two fkirmifhes, 

h Forbes, vol. i. p. 4.j;4. 460. i Spotfwood, p. 146. ^ Knox, 
p. 217. Haynes's State p.ipers, vol. i. p. 153, Rymer, tom> xv. p- 569, 
^ Haynes, vol. i. p. 256. 259. 

D 2 in 



35 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, in the former of which the Englifh had the advan* 
/"[f™; tage, in the latter the French, they began to batter 
J560. the town ; and, though repulfed with confiderable 
lofs In a rafh and ill-condu6led aflault, they reduced 
the garrifon to great difficulties. Their diflrefs was 
augmented by two events ; the difperfion by a ftorm 
of d'Elbeuf s fleet, which carried a confiderable army 
on board "*, and the death of the queen-regent, who 
expired about this time in the caftle of Edinburgh ; 
a woman endowed with all the capacity which ino^Q 
forth in her family, but pofleflcd of nv;':h more vir- 
tue and moderation than appeared in the conducl of 
the other branches of it. The French, who found 
it impoffible to fubfifl for want of provifions, and 
who faw, that the Englifh were continually reinforced 
5th July, by fre(h numbers, were obliged to capitulate : And 
the bifliop of Valence and count Randan, plenipo- 
tentiaries from France, figned a treaty at Edinburgh 
with Cecil and Dr. Wotton, whom Elizabeth had 
Settlement fent thither for that purpofe. It was there ftipulated, 
land'^^*' that the French fhould inftantly evacuate Scotland ; 
that the king and queen of France and Scotland 
fhould thenceforth abftain from bearing the arms of 
England, or affuming the title of that kingdom ; 
that farther fatisfaftion for the injury already done 
in that particular fhould be granted Elizabeth ; and 
the commiilioners fhould meet to fettle this point, 
or if they could not agree, that the king of Spain 
fhould be umpire between the crowns. Befides thefe 
ftipulations, which regarded England, fome concef- 
fions were granted to the Scots ; namely, that an 
amnefty fhould be publiflied for all pafl offences ; 
that none but natives fliould enjoy any office in Scot- 
land ; that the flates fhould name twenty-four per- 
fons, of whom the queen of Scots fhould choofe feven, 
and the flates five, and in the hands of thefe twelve 

^ IlayncS; vol. i, p. azj. 

ihould 



ELIZABETH. 37 

fliould the whole admmiflration be placed during CHAP. 
their queen's abfence ; and that Mary fhould neither ^^^^!^^^^i^ 
make peace nor war without confent of the dates". 1560 
In order to haften the execution of this important 
treaty, Elizabeth fent fhips, by which the French 
forces were tranfported into their own country. 

Thus Europe faw, in the firft tranfadion of this 
reign, the genius and capacity of the queen and her 
minifters. She difcerned at a diftance the danger 
which threatened her ; and inftantly took vigorous 
meafures to prevent it. Making .:,!. poflible ad- 
vantages of her fituation, fhe proceeded with cele- 
rity to a decifion ; and was not diverted by any 
offers, negotiations, or remonflrances of the French 
court. She flopped not till fhe had brought the 
matter to a final iffue ; and had converted that very 
power, to which her enemies trufled for her de- 
flruftion, into her firmefl fupport and fecurity. 
By exading no improper conditions from the Scottifh 
malcontenis, even during their greateft diflrefl'es, flie 
eftablifhed an entire confidence with them ; and 
having cemented the union by all the ties of gra- 
titude, interefl, and religion, fhe now pofTeffed an 
influence over them beyond what remained even 
with their native fovereign. The regard, which 
fhe acquired by this dexterous and fpirited condudl, 
gave her every where, abroad as well as at home, 
more authority than had attended her fifler, though 
fupported by all the power of the Spanifh mo- 
narchy ^ 

The fubfequent meafures of the Scottifh reform- 
ers tended flill more to cement their union with 
England. Being now entirely mafters of the king- 
dom, they made no farther ceremony or fcruple in 
fully effedling their purpofe. In the treaty of Edin- 

n Rymer, vol. xv. p. 59?. Keith, p. t37. Spatfwood, p. 147. 
Knox, p. 129, • Forbes, vol. i. p. 354. 372. Jebb, vol. li. p. 452. 

D 3 burgh 



38 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, burgh it had been agreed, that a parliament or 
^^^^^^Ij^ convention fhould foon be afTembled ; and the 
1560. leaders of the Congregation, not waiting till the 
queen of Scots fhould ratify that treaty, thought 
themfelves fully entitled, without the fovereign's 
authority, immediately to fummon a parliament. 
The reformers prefented a petition to this aifembly ; 
in which they were not contented with defiring the 
eftablifhment of their doftrine ; they alfo applied 
for the puniihment of the catholics, whom they 
called vaffals to the Roman harlot ; and they af- 
ferted, that, among all the rabble of the clergy, 
fuch is their expreffion, there was not one lawful 
niinifter; but that they were, all of them, thieves 
and murderers ; yea, rebels and traitors to civil au- 
thority ; and therefore unworthy to be fuffered in 
any reformed commonwealth ^. The parhament feem 
to have been actuated by the fame fpirit of rage 
and perfecution. After ratifying a confeffion of 
faith agreeable to the new doctrines, they pafTed 
a flatute againfl the mafs, and not only aboliflied it 
in all the churches, but enacled, that whoever, any 
where, either officiated in it, or was prefent at it, 
fhould be chaftifed, for the firft offence, with con- 
fifcation of goods and corporal punifhment, at the 
difcretion of the magiflrate ; for the fecond, with 
baniflrment ; and for the third, with lofs of life ^. 
A law was alfo voted for abolifliing the papal ju- 
iifdi£lion in Scotland : 1 he prefbyterian form of 
diCcipline was fettled, leaving only at firfl fome fha- 
dow of authority to certain ecclefiaftics, whom they 
called Siiperintendants. The prelates of the ancient 
faith appeared, in order to complain of great in^ 
juflice committed on them by the invafion of their 
property, but the parliament took no notice of 
them J till, at laff, thefe ecclefiaftics, tired with 

P Knox, p. 137, 138. 1 Ibid. p. 254.. 

fruitlefs 



ELIZABETH. 



39 



fruklefs attendance, departed the town. They were chap. 
then cited to appear ; and as nobody prefented him- ^^^^["J^ 
felf, it was voted by the parliament, that the eccle- ,^$0. 
fiaftics were entirely fatisfied, and found no reafon 
of complaint. 

Sir James Sandilands, prior of St. John, was 
fent over to France to obtain the ratification of thefe 
ads ; but was very ill received by Mary, who de- 
nied the validity of a parliament fummoned with- 
out the royal confent ; and flie refufed her fandion 
to thofe ftatutes. But the proteftants gave them- 
felves little concern about their queen's refufal. 
They immediately put the ftatutes in execution : 
They abolifhed the mafs ; they fettled their mi- 
nifters ; they committed every where furious de- 
vaftations on the monafteries, and even on the 
churches, which they thought profaned by idolatry, 
and deeming the property of the clergy lawful prize, 
they took pofTelTion, without ceremony, of the far 
greater part of the ecclefiaftical revenues. Their 
new preachers, who had authority fufficient to in- 
cite them to war and infurredion, could not reftrain 
their rapacity j and fanaticifm concurring with ava- 
rice, an incurable wound was given to the papal 
authority in that country. The proteftant nobility 
and gentry, united by the confcioufnsfs of fuch un- 
pardonable guilt, alarmed for their new pofTeflions, 
well acquainted with the imperious charafter of the 
houfe of Guile, faw no fafety for themfelves but in 
the protection of England ; and they difpatched 
Morton, Glencairne, and Lidington, to exprefs their 
fincere gratitude to the queen for her pafl favours, 
and reprefent to her the neceffity of continuing 
them. 

Elizabeth, on her part, had equal reafon to French 
maintain a union with the Scottifh proteftants ; and ^^^'"' 
foon found that the houfe of Guife, notwithftand- 
ing their former difappointments, had not laid afide 
the defign of contefling her title, and fubverting 

D 4 her 



40 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, her authority. Francis and Mary, whofe counfels 
^^^5I!!ii^ were wholly direded by them, refufed to ratify the 
,360. treaty of Edinburgh ; and fhewed no difpofition to 
give her any fatisfaclion for that mortal aifront, 
which they had put upon her, by their openly af- 
fuming the title and arms of England. She was 
fenfible of the danger attending fuch pretenfions ; 
and it was with pleafure fhe heard of the violent 
faftions which prevailed in the French government, 
and of the oppofition which had arifen againft the 
nieafures of the duke of Guife. That ambitious 
prince, fupported by his four brothers, the cardinal 
of Lorraine, the duke of Aumale, the marquis of 
Elbeuf, and the grand prior, men no lefs ambitious 
than himfelf, had engroffed all the authority of the 
crown ; and as he was pofleiTed of every quality 
which could command the efteem or feduce the af- 
fections of men, there appeared no end of his ac- 
quifitions and pretenfions. The conftable, Mont- 
jnorency, who had long balanced his credit, was de- 
prived of all power : The princes of the blood, the 
king of Navarre, and his brother, the prince of 
Conde, were entirely excluded from offices and 
favour : The queen-mother herfelf, Catherine de 
Medicis, found her influence every day decUning : 
And as Francis, a young prince, infirm both in 
jnind and body, was wholly governed by his con^ 
fort, who knew no law but the pleafure of her 
uncles, men defpaired of ever obtaining freedom 
from the dominion of that afpiring family. It was 
the contefts of religion which firft infpired the 
French with courage openly to oppofe their un* 
limited authority. 

The theological difputes, firfl ftarted in the north 
of Germany, nejct in Switzerland, countries at that 
time wholly ilHterate, had long ago penetrated into 
France ; and as they were affifted by the general dif- 
content againft the court and church of Rome, and 
by the zealous fpirit of the age, the profelytes to the 



ELIZABETH. 4^ 

new teligion were fecretly increafing in every pro- C H A p^ 
vince. Henry II. in imitation of his father Francis, ^^^^^!;™^ 
had oppofed the progrefs of the reformers; and ,^60. 
though a prince addided to pleafure and fociety, he 
was tranfported by a vehemence, as well as bigotry, 
which had little place in the conduft of his pre- 
deceflbr. Rigorous punifhments had been inflifted 
on the mofl eminent of the proteftant party ; and 
a point of honour feemed to have arifen, whether 
the one fe6t could exercife, or the other fuffer, mod 
barbarity. The death of Henry put fome flop to 
the perfecutions ; and the people, who had admired 
the conftancy of the new preachers, now heard with 
favour their doftrines and arguments. But the car- 
dinal of Lorraine, as well as his brothers, who were 
poffeffed of the legal authority, thought it their in- 
terefl to fupport the eftablifhed religion ; and when, 
they revived the execution of the penal ftatutes, 
they necelTarily drove the malcontent princes and 
nobles to embrace the proteftion of the new religion. 
The king of Navarre, a man of mild difpofitions, 
but of a weak charader, and the prince of Conde, 
who pofTelTed many great qualities, having declared 
themfelves in favour of the proteftants, that fe£t 
acquired new force from their countenance ; and 
the admiral, Coligni, with his brother, Andelot, no 
longer fcrupled to make open profellion of their 
communion. The integrity of the admiral, who was 
believed fmcere in his attachment to the new doc- . 
trine, and his great reputation both for valour and 
conduft, for the arts of peace as well as of war, 
brought credit to the reformers ; and after a fruf- 
trated attempt of the malcontents to feize the king's 
perfon at Amboife, of which Elizabeth had probably 
fome intelligence ', every place was full of diftradion, 

* Forbes, vol. i. p. 414.. Throgmorton, about this time, unwilling 
40 entruft to letters the great fecrets committed to him, obtained leave, 
Kuder fome pretext, to come over to London. 

and 



J5 o. 



42 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, and matters haftened to an open rupture between the 
^^Z^ parties. But the houfe of Guife, though thefe fac- 
tions had obliged them to remit their efforts in 
Scotland, and had been one chief caufe of Ehza- 
beth*s fuccefs, were determined not to relinquifh 
their authority in France, or yield to the violence of 
their enemies. They found an opportunity of feiz- 
ing the king of Navarre and the prince of Conde ; 
they threw the former into prifon ; they obtained a 
fentence of death againft the latter ; and they were 
proceeding to put the fentence into execution, when 
the king's fudden death faved the noble prifoner, 
and interrupted the profperity of the duke of Guife. 
4tli Dec. The queen-mother was appointed regent to her fon 
'5^*' Charles IX. now in his minority : The king of 
Navarre was named lieutenant-general of the king- 
dom : The fentence againft Conde' was annulled ; 
The conftable was recalled to court : And the fa- 
mily of Guife, though they ftill enjoyed great of- 
fices and great power, found a counterpoife to their 
authority. 

Elizabeth was determined to make advantage 
of thefe events- againft the queen of Scots, whom, 
fhe ftill regarded as a dangerous rival. She faw 
herfelf freed from the perils attending a union of 
Scotland with France, and from the pretenfions of 
fo powerful a prince as Francis ; but fhe confidered 
at the fame time, that the Engliili catholics, who 
were numerous, and who were generally prejudiced 
in favour of Mary's title, would now adhere to that 
princefs with more zealous attachment, when they 
faw that her fucceftion no longer endangered the 
liberties of the kingdom, and was rather attended 
with the advantage of eifeding an entire union with 
Scotland. She gave orders, therefore, to her am- 
baflador, Throgmorton, a vigilant and able minifter, 
to renew his applications to th^ queen of Scots, and 
to require her ratification of the treaty of Edin.^ 

burgh « 



ELIZABETH. 43 

burgh. But though Mary had defifted, after her chap. 
hulband*s death, from bearing the arms and title of ,J"^?I^ 
queen of England, fhe flill declined gratifying Eli- ,561, 
zabeth in this momentous article ; and being fvvayed 
by the ambitious fuggeflions of her uncles, fhe re- 
fufed to make any formal renunciation of her pre- 
tenfions. 

Meanwhile, the queen-mother of France, who 
imputed to Mary all the mortifications which fhe 
had met with during Francis's hfe-time, took care 
to retaliate on her by like injuries ; and the queen 
of Scots, finding her abode in France difagreeable, 
began to think of returning to her native country. 
Lord James, who had been fent in deputation from 
the ftates to invite her over, feconded thefe inten- 
tions ; and fhe applied to Elizabeth, by D'Oifel, 
for a fafe-conduft, in cafe (he fhould be obliged to 
pafs through England ' : But fhe received for anfwer, 
that, till fhe had given fatisfaftion, by ratifying the 
treaty of Edinburgh, fhe could expeft no favour 
from a perfon whom fhe had fo much injured. This 
denial excited her indignation ; and fhe made no 
fcruple of exprelTmg her fentiments to Throg- 
morton, when he reiterated his applications to gra- 
tify his miftrefs in a demand which he reprefented as 
fo reafonable. Having cleared the room of her at- 
endants, fhe faid to him, " How weak I may prove, 
' or how far a woman's frailty may tranfport me, 
' I cannot tell : However, I am refolved not to 
' have fo many witnefles of my infirmity as your 
' miftrefs had at her audience of my ambalfador 
' D Oifel. There is nothing difturbs me fo much, 
' as the having alked, with fo much importunity, 
' a favour which it was of no confequence for me 
' to obtain. I can, with God's leave, return to 
' my own country without her leave ; as I came to 
' France, in fpire of all the oppofition of her bro- 
' ther, king Edward : Neither do I want friends 

» Goodall, vol. i, p. 175, 

« both 



44 

CHAP. 
XXXVIII. 

5561. 



HISTORY OF ENGLAN'D. 

both able and willing to conduft me home, as 
they have brought me hither ; though I was de- 
lirous rather to make an experiment of your mif- 
trefs's friendfhip, than of the affiflance of any 
other perfon. I have often heard you fay, that 
a good correfpondence between her and myfelf 
would conduce much to the fecurity and hap- 
pinefs of both our kingdoms : Were Ihe well 
convinced of this truth, fhe would hardly have 
denied me fo fmall a requeft. But, perhaps, fhe 
bears a better inclination to my rebellious fubjefis 
than to me, their fovereign, her equal in royal 
dignity, her near relation, and the undoubted 
heir of her kingdoms. Befides her friendftiip, 
I alk nothing at her hands : I neither trouble 
her, nor concern myfelf in the affairs of her 
flate : Not that I am ignorant, that there are 
now in England a great many malcontents, who 
are no friends to the prefent eftablifhment. She 
is pleafed to upbraid me as a perfon little expe- 
rienced in the world : I freely own it ; but age 
will cure that defeft. However, I am already 
old enough to acquit myfelf honeftly and courte- 
oufly to my friends and relations, and to encou- 
rage no reports of your miftrefs, which would 
mifbecome a queen and her kinfwoman. I would 
alfo fay, by her leave, that I am a queen as well 
as file, and not altogether friendlefs : And, per- 
haps, I have as great a foul too ; fo that me- 
thinks we fhould be upon a level in our treatment 
of each other. As foon as I have confuked the 
flates of my kingdom, I fhall be ready to give 
her a reafonable anfwer ; and I am the more in- 
tent on my journey, in order to make the quicker 
difpatch in this affair. But fhe, it feems, intends 
to flop my journey ; fo that either fhe will not 
let me give her fatisfaclion, or is refolved not to 
be fatisfied ; perhaps, on purpofe to keep up the 
difagreement between us. She has often re- 

" proached 



ELIZABETH. 45 

*^ proached me with my being young ; and I muft chap. 
<' be very young indeed, and as ill-advifed, 10 treat ^J^^5^!^ 
" of matters of fuch great concern and importance ,561, 
*' without the advice of my parliament. I have not 
*' been wanting in all friendly offices to her ; but 
*' fhe difbelieves or overlooks them. I could 
*' heartily wi{h, that I were as nearly allied to her 
" in affedion as in blood : For that, indeed, would 
** be a moft valuable alliance ".'* 

Such a fpirited reply, notwithilanding the ob- 
liging terms interfperfed in it, was but ill fitted to 
conciliate friendjQiip between thefe rival princeflTes, 
or cure thofe mutual jealoufies which had already 
taken place. Elizabeth equipped a fleet, on pre- 
tence of purfuing pirates, but probably with an 
intention of intercepting the queen of Scots in her 
return homewards. Mary embarked at Calais ; '9^^ Aug. 
and paffing the Englifh fleet in a fog, arrived fafely MarTin°* 
at Leith, attended by her three uncles, the duke Scotland, 
of Aumale, the grand prior, and the marquis of 
Elbeuf, together with the marquis of Damville, and 
other French courtiers. This change of abode and 
fituation was very little agreeable to that princefs. 
Befidcs her natural prepofleflions in favour of a 
country in which fhe had been educated from her 
earheft infancy, and where flie had borne fo high a 
rank, fhe could not forbear both regretting the fo- 
ciety of that people, fo celebrated for their humane 
difpofition, and their refpedful attachment to their 
fovereign, and refleding on the difparity of the 
fcene which lay before her. It is faid that, after 
fhe was embarked at Calais, fhe kept her eyes fixed 
on the coafl of France, and never turned them 
from that beloved objed:, till darknefs fell, and inter- 
cepted it from her view. She then ordered a couch 
to be' fpread for her in the open air ; and charged 
the pilot, that if in the morning the land were ftill 

^ Caballa, p. 374, Spotfwood, p. 177. 

in 



46 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, m fight, he fhould awake her, and afford her one 
?"^^^^|^^ parting view of that country, in which all her af- 
,361. fedlions were centered. The weather proved calm, 
fo that the fhip made little way in the night-time : 
And Mary had once more an opportunity of feeing 
the French coaft. She fat upon her couch, and 
flill looking towards the land, often repeated thefe 
words : *' Farewell, France, farewell ; I fhall never 
" fee thee more ' ." The firft afped, however, of 
things in Scotland was more favourable, if not to 
her pleafure and happinefs, at lead to her repofe and 
fecurity, than Ihe had reafon to apprehend. No 
fooner did the French gallies appear off Leith, than 
people of all ranks, who had long expeded their 
arrival, flocked towards the fhore with an earneft 
impatience to behold and receive their young fove- 
reign. Some were led by duty, fome by intereft, 
fome by curiofity ; and all combined to exprefs their 
attachment to her, and to infmuate themfelves into 
her confidence, on the commencement of her ad- 
miniilration. She had now reached her nineteenth 
year ; and the bloom of her youth and amiable 
beauty of her perfon were farther recommended by 
the affability of her addrefs, the politenefs of her 
manners, and the elegance of her genius. Well 
accomplifhed in all the fuperficial, but engaging 
graces of a court, fhe afforded, when better known, 
ftill more promifmg indications of her charafter; 
and men prognofticated both humanity from her foft 
and obliging deportment, and penetration from her 
talle in all the refined arts of mufic, eloquence, and 
poetry ^. And as the Scots had long been deprived 
of the prefence of their fovereign, whom they once 
defpaired ever more to behold among them, her ar- 
rival feemed to give univerfal fatisfaftion j and no- 

" Keith, p. 179. Jebb, vol. ii. p, 483. 

" Buchan. lib. xvii. c. 9. Spotfwood, y. 178, 179. Keith, p. i8o. 
Thuan. lib. xxix. c. ». 

thin^ 



ELIZABETH. 47. 

thing appeared about the court, but fymptoms of chap. 
afFc(^ion, joy, and feftivity. \..^-J^ii 

The firft meafures which Mary embraced con- 1561. ' 
firmed all the prepofleflions entertained in her fa- 
vour. She followed the advice given her in France 
by D'Oifel and the bilhop of Amiens, as well as her 
uncles ; and fhe beftowed her confidence entirely on 
the leaders of the reformed party, who had greatefl 
influence over the people, and who, Ihe found, were 
alone able to fupport her government. Her bro- 
ther, lord James, whom Ihe foon after created earl 
of Murray, obtained the chief authority j and after 
him Lidington, fecretary of flate, a man of great fa- 
gacity, had a principal fhare in her confidence. By 
the vigour of thefe men's meafures fhe endeavoured 
to eflabhfh order and juftice in a country divided by 
public fadions and private feuds ; and that fierce, 
intraftable people, unacquainted with laws and obe- 
dience, feemed, for a time, to fubmit peaceably to 
her gentle and prudent adminiflration. 

But there was one circumftance which blafled all 
thefe promifmg appearances, and bereaved Mary of 
that general favour which her agreeable manners 
and judicious deportment gave her jufl; reafon to 
expeft. She was flill a papift ; and though fhe pub- 
lifhed foon after her arrival, a proclamation, enjoin- 
ing every one to fubmit to the eftablifhed religion, 
the preachers and their adherents could neither be 
reconciled to a perfon polluted with fo great an abo- 
mination, nor lay afide their jealoufies of her future 
conduct. It was with great difficulty fhe could ob- 
tain permifTion for faying mafs in her own chapel ; 
and had not the people apprehended, that, if Ihe 
had here met with a refufal, fhe would inftantly have 
returned to France, the zealots never would have 
granted her even that fmall indulgence. The cry 
was, " Shall we fuffer that idol to be again erected 
" within the realm ?** It was alTerted in the pulpit, 

that 



48 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, that one mafs was more terrible than ten thoufand 
^^^^5!^ armed men landed to invade the kingdom " ; lord 
,561. Lindefey, and the gentlemen of Fife, exclaimed, 
" That the idolator Ihould die the death 5" fuch 
was their expreflion. One that carried tapers for 
the ceremony of that worlhip, was attacked and in- 
fulted in the court of the palace : And if lord James, 
and fome popular leaders, had not interpofed, the 
niofl dangerous uproar was juftly apprehended 
from the ungoverned fury of the multitude ^. The 
ufual prayers in the churches were to this purpofe : 
That God would turn the queen's heart, which was 
obflinate againft him and his truth ; or if his holy 
will be otherwife, that he would flrengthen the hearts 
and hands of the elect, floutly to oppofe the rage of 
all tyrants ^. Nay, it was openly called in queftion, 
whether that princefs, being an idolatrefs, was en- 
titled to any authority, even in civil matters ^ ? 

The helplefs queen was every moment expofed to 
contumely, which fhe bore with benignity and pa- 
tience. Soon after her arrival fhe dined in the caflle 
of Edinburgh, and it was there contrived, that a 
boy, fix years of age, Ihould be let down from the 
roof, and fhould prefent her with a bible, a pfal- 
ter, and the keys of the caftle. Left fhe fhould be 
at a lofs to underftand this infult on her as a papift, 
all the decorations expreffed the burning of Corah, 
Dathan, and Abiram, and other punifhments inflifted 
by God upon idolatry ''. The town-council of Edin- 
burgh had the alTurance, from their own authority, 
to iflue a proclamation, banifhing from their diftri^ 
" all the wicked rabble of antichrifl, the pope, fuch 
^' as priefts, monks, friars, together with adulterers 
" and fornicators '.'* And becaufe the privy-council 
fufpended the magiftrates for their infolence, the paf-^ 

* Knox, p. aSy. T Ibid. p. 184, 485. 187. Spotfwood, p. 179, 
» Keitli, p. 179. * Ibid, p, zo*. * Ibid, p. 189. 



^ Ibid. p. 192, 



1 1 fionate 



Elizabeth. " 49 

fionate hidorians ^ of that age have inferred, that the C H A P. 

, , P u r ^ XXXVIII. 

queen was engaged, by a iympathy or manners, to v^^^-.,^,,-,^ 
take adulterers and fornicators under her protection. 1561. 
it appears probable, that the magiftrates were after- 
wards rein Hated in their office, and that their pro- 
clamation was confirmed % 

But all the infolence of the people was incon- 
fiderable in comparifon of that which was exercifed 
by the clergy and the preachers, who took a pride 
in vilifying, even to her face, this amiable princefs. 
The alfembly of the church framed an addrefs, in 
which, after telling her, that her mafs was a baftard 
fervice of God, the fountain of all impiety, and the 
fource of every evil which abounded in the realm ; 
they exprefled their hopes, that fhe would ere this 
time have preferred truth to her own pre-conceived 
opinion, and have renounced her religion, which, 
they aflured lier, was nothing but abomination and 
vanity. -They faid, that the prefent abufes of govern- 
ment were fo enormous, that, if a fpeedy remedy 
\Vere not provided, God would not fail in his anger 
to flrike the head and the tail, the difobedient prince 
and finful people. They required, that fevere pu- 
nifliment fiiould be infiided on adulterers and for- 
nicators. And they concluded with demanding for 
themfelves fome addition both of power and pro- 
perty '^. 

The ringleader in all thefe infults on majefty was 
John Knox ; who poflefled an uncontrolled autho- 
rity in the church, and even in the civil affairs of 
the nation, and who triumphed in the contumelious 
ufage of his fovereign. His ufual appellation for 
the queen was Jezebel ; and though fiie endeavour- 
ed, by the moll gracious condefcenfion, to win his 
favour, all her infmuarions could gain nothing on 
his obdurate heart. She promifed him accefs to her 

^ KnoX, p.igi. Buchan. lib. xvii. c. 20. Kaynes, vol. i. p. 372. 
''■ Keith, p. 202. f Krox, p. 3IX, jiz. 

Vol. V. E whenever 



so HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, whenever he demanded it ; and fl:ie even defired 
^_^^^^.„^ him, if he found her blamable in any thing, to 
ij6i. reprehend her freely in private, rather than vilify 
^ her in the pulpit before the whole people : But he 
plainly told her, that he had a public miniftry en- 
trufted to him ; that if Ihe would come to church, 
Jhe fliould there hear the gofpel of truth ; and that 
it was not his bufmefs to apply to every individual, 
nor had he leifure for that occupation^. The po- 
litical prinriplts of the man, v/hich he communi- 
cated to his brethren, were as full of fedition as his 
theological were of rage and bigotry. Though he 
once condefcended fo far as to tell the queen that 
he would fubmit to her, in the fame manner as Paul 
did to Nero ^ ; he remained not long in this dutiful j 
flrain. He faid to her, that " Samuel feared not to 
" flay Agag, the fat and delicate king of Amalek, 
*' whom king Saul had faved : Neither fpared Elias 
" Jezettl's falfe prophets, and Baal's priefts, though 
" King Ahab was prefent. Phineas," added he, 
" was no magiilrate ; yet feared he not to ftrike 
** Ccfbi and Zimri in the very act of filthy forni- 
" cation. And fo, Madam, your grace may fee, 
" that others than chief magiftrates may lawfully 
" inflicl punifliment on fuch crimes as are con- 
" demned bv the law of God '." Knox had for-* 
merly, during the reign of Mary of England, writ- 
ten a book againfl female fucceffion to the crown : 
The title of it is, The firji hlafi of the trumpet againji 
the monjiroiis regimen of women. He was too proud 
either to recant the tenets of this book, or even to 
apologize for them \ and, his conduct fliewed, that 
he thought no more civility than loyalty due to any 
of the female fex. 

The whole life of Mary was, from the demean- 
our of thefe men, filled v/ith bitternefs and forrow. 
This ruftic apollle fcruples not, in his hiltory, to 

I Knor, p. 310. ^ Ibid p. aS3, * IblJ. p. 316. 

inform 



ELIZABETH. 51 

inform us, that he once treated her with fuch feve- chap. 
rity, that fhe loft all command of temper, and dif- v,^^,.,^^-,^/ 
folvedi n tears before him : Yet, fo far from benig 1561. 
moved with youth, and beauty, and royal dignity 
reduced to fhat condition, he perfevered in his in* 
folent reproofs ; and when he relates this incident, 
he difcovers a vifible pride and fatisfatlion in his 
own conduft ^, The pulpits had become mere 
fcenes of railing againfl the vices of the court ; 
among which v/ere always noted as the principal^ 
feafting, finery, dancing, balls, and whoredom, their 
necelTary attendant '. Some ornaments, which the 
ladies at that time wore upon their petticoats, ex- 
cited mightily the indignation of the preachers ; and 
they affirmed, that fuch vanity would provoke God*s 
vengeance, not only againll thefe focliflTi women, 
but againfl the whole realm '"- 

Mary, whofe age, condition, and education, in- 
vited her to liberty and cheerfuinefs, was curbed in 
all amufements by the abfurd feverity of thefe re- 
formers ; and fhe found every miOment reafon to re- 
gret her leaving that country, from whofe manners 
file had, in her early youth, received the firft im- 
preffions ". Her two uncles, the duke of Aumale, 
and the grand prior, with the other French nobility^ 
foon took leave of her : The ma?., j^ v of Eibeuf le- 
mained fome time longer; but after his derr •uf-'^, 
fhe was left to the iociety of her own fubjefts ; men 
tmacquainted with the pleafurcs of converfation, ig- 
norant of arts and civility, and corrupted beyond 
their ufuai rullicity, by a difmal fanaticifm, which 
rendered them incapable of all humanity or im- 
provement. Though Mary had made no attempt 
to reftore the ancient religion, her popery was a fuf- 
ficient crime : 1 hough her behaviour was hitherto 
irreproachable, and her manners fweet and engaging, 
her gaiety and eafe were interpreted as figns of dif- 

^ Knox, p. 33a, 233. 1 Ibid. p. 322. » Ibid. p. 330. 

" Ibid. p. 104.. 

E 2 folute 



5-2 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

c Fi A P. folute vanity. And to the harfli and prepofterouc 

^"^^^^^^j[^ ufage, which this princefs met with, may, in part, 

1 56 1, be afcribed thofe errors of her fubfequent condud:, 

which feemed fo httle of a piece with the general 

tenor of her character. 

There happened to the marquis of Elbeuf, be- 
fore his departure, an adventure, which, though 
frivolous, might enable him to give Mary's friends 
in France a melancholy idea of her fituation. This 
nobleman, with the earl of Bothwel, and fome other 
young courtiers, had been engaged, after a debauch, 
to pay a vifit to a woman called Alifon Craig, who 
was known to be liberal of her favours ; and becaufe 
they were denied admittance, they broke the win- 
dows, thrufl open the door, and committed fome 
diforders in fearcliing for the damfel. It happened, 
that the afiembly of the church was fitting at that 
time, and they immediately took the matter under 
their cognizance. In conjunction with feveral of 
the nobility, they prefented an addrefs to the queen, 
which was introduced with this awful prelude : 
*' To the queen's majeily, and to her fecret aiid 
*' great council, her grace's faithful and obedient 
" fubjeffcs, the profelfors of Chrill Jefus's holy 
*' evangil, wifh the fpirit of righteous judgment." 
The tenor of the petition was, that the fear of God, 
the duty which they owed her grace, and the ter- 
rible threatenings denounced by God againft every 
city or country v^here horrible crimes were openly 
committed, compelled them to demand the fevere 
punifhment of fuch as had done Vv'hat in them lay to 
kindle the wrath of God againft the whole realm : 
That the iniquity of which they complained, was 
fo heinous and fo horrible, that they fliould efteem 
themfelves accomplices in it, if they had been en- 
gaged by worldly fear, or fervile complaifance, to 
pals it over in filence, or bury it in oblivion : That 
as they owed her grace obedience in the adminiflra- 
tion of jiiflice, fo were they entitled to require of 

her. 



ELIZABETH. 



53 



Tier, in return, the fharp and condign punifliment of chap. 
this enormity, which, they repeated it, might draw J"^^^T!^ 
down the vengeance of God on the whole kingdom : ,^gj. 
And that they maintained it to be her duty to hiy afide 
all private affedions towards the aclors in fo heinous 
a crime, and fo enormous a villany, and without 
delay bring them to a trial, and inilift the fevereft 
penalties upon them. The queen gave a gracious 
reception to this peremptory addrefs ; but becaufe 
fhe probably thought that breaking the windows of 
a brothel merited not fuch fcvere reprehenfion, flie 
only replied, that her lincle was a ftranger, and that 
he was attended by a young company : But fhe 
would put fuch order to him and to all others, that 
her fubjefts fhould 'henceforth have no reafon to 
complain. Her palling over this incident fo ilightly 
was the fource of great difcontent, and was regarded 
as a proof of the mod profligate manners ^ It is 
not to be omitted, that AHfon Craig, the caufe of 
all the uproar, was known to entertain a commerce 
with the earl of Arran, who, on account of his great 
zeal for the reformation, was, without fcruple, in- 
dulged in that enormity ^. 

Some of the populace of Edinburgh broke into 
the queen's chapel during her abfence, and com- 
mitted outrages ; . for which two of them were in- 
dicted, and it was intended to bring them to trial. 
Knox wrote circular letters to the mod confiderable 
zealots of the party, and charged them to appear in. 
town, and prote(!il their brethren. The holy facra- 
ments, he there faid, are abufed by profane papifts ; 
the mafs has been faid ; and in worfhipping that 
idol, the priefts have omitted no ceremony, not 
even the conjuring of their accurfed water, that had 
ever been praCtifed in the time of the greatefl blind- 
nefs. Thefe violent meafures for oppoling juflice 

o Knox, p. 2CZ, 303, 304-. Keith, p. 509. P Knox, ibid. 

E 3 were 



54 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, were little fhort of rebellion ; and Knox was fum- 
xxxviii jy^Qne(j before the council to anfwer for his offence. 
, jj^. The courage of the man was equal to his infolence. 
He fcrupled not to tell the queen, that the peflilent 
papiilsj who had inflamed her againft thefe holy- 
men, were the fons of the devil ; and muff thierefore 
obey the diredions of their father, who had been 
a liar and a manflayer from the beginning. The 
matter ended with a full acquittal of Knox ''. 
Randolph, the Englifli ambaflador in Scotland, had 
reafon to write to Cecil, fpeaking of the Scottifh 
jiation : " I think marvelloufly of the wifdom of 
" God, that gave this unruly, inconftant, and cum- 
^' berlome people no more power nor fubftance : 
^' For they would otherwife run wild '.'* 

We have related thefe incidents at greater length 
than the nscefiity of our fubjccl may feem to re- 
quire : But even trivial circum (lances, which fnew 
the manners of the age, are often more inftruftive, 
as well as entertaining, than the great tranfaclions 
of wars and negotiations, which are nearly fimilar 
m all periods and in all countries of the world. 

The reformed clergy in Scotland had, at that 
time, a very natural reafon for their ill-humour ; 
namely, the poverty, or rather beggary, to which 
they were reduced. The nobility and gentry had 
at firll laid their liands on all the property of the 
regular clergy, without making any provinon for 
the friars and nuns, whom they turned out of their 
pofieflions. The fecular clergy of the catholic com*- 
munion, though they loft all ecclefiaftical jurifdics 
tion, (liil held fome of the temporalities of their 
benefices ; and either became laymen themielves, 
?ind converted them into private property, or made 
conveyance of them at low prices to the nobilityg 
WJtjo thus enriched themfeives by the plunder of the 

? Knox, p. 336- 34X. » Keiih, p. 302. 

c churcho 



ELIZABETH. S5 

church. The new teachers had hitherto fubfifled chap. 
chiefly by the voluntary oblations of the faithful ; JJ^^^^^l!^ 
and in a poor country, divided in religious fenti- ,^61. 
ments, this eftablifliment was regarded as very 
fcanty and very precarious. Repeated applications 
were made for a legal fettlemcnt to the preachers j 
and though almoft every thing in the kingdom 
was governed by their zeal and caprice, it was with 
difficulty that their requeft was at lafl complied 
with. The fanatical fpirit which they indulged, and 
their induftry in decrying the principles and prac- 
tices of the Roman communion, which placed fuch 
merit in enriching the clergy, proved now a very 
fenfible obftacle to their acquifitions The conven- 
tion, however, paffed a vote% by which they di- 
vided all the ecclefialtical benefices into twenry-one 
fhares : They alligned fourteen to the ancient pof- 
feflbrs : Of the remaining feven they granted three 
to the crown ; and if that were found to anlwer the 
public expences, they bellowed the overplus on the 
reformed minifters. The queen was empc^vered to 
Isvy all the feven ; and it was ordained that fhe 
(hould afterwards pay to the clergy what fhouid be 
judged to fuffice for their maintenance. The ne- 
ceffities of the crown, the rapacity of the courtiers, 
and the fmall aftedion which Mary bore to the 
prot^ftant ecclefiaftics, rendered their revenues con- 
temptible as well as uncertain ; and the preachers, 
finding that they could not rival the gentry, or even 
the middling rank of men, in opulence and plenty, 
were neceffitated "o betake themlelv^s to other ex- 
pedients for fupporting their authority. i hey af- 
fefted a furioui; zeal for religion, morofe manners, 
a vulgar and familiar, yet myfterious cant ; and 
though the liberality of fubfequent pruices put them 

* Kn«», p. 296. Keith, p, 2x0, 

E 4 skQY- 



56 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, afterwards on a better footlnsr with recrard to reve- 

%f Y Y \T ITT Cj kD 

^^^^...^^^ nue, and thereby corre^ed in feme degree thofe 

,561. bad habits ; it muft be confefled, that, while many 

other advantages attend prefbyterian government, 

thefe inconveniencies are not eafily feparated from 

the genius of that ecclefiaftical polity. 

The queen of Scots, deftitute of all force, 
poffefTmg a narrow revenue, furrounded with a 
factious turbulent nobility, a bigoted people, and 
infolent ecclefiallics, foon found, that her only ex- 
pedient for maintaining tranquillity was to preferve 
a good correfpondence with Elizabeth \ who, by 
former connexions and fer vices, had acquired fuch 
authority over all thefe ranks of men. Soon after 
her arrival in Scotland, fecretary Lidington was fent 
to London, in order to pay her compliments to the 
queen, and exprefs her defire of friendfhip and a 
good correfpondence ; and he received a commillion 
from her, as well as from the nobility of Scotland, 
to demand, as a means of cementing this friendlhip, 
that Mary lliould, by act of parliament or by pro- 
clamation, (for the diiference between thefe fecurities 
v.'as not then deemed very confiderable,) be declared 
fucceffor to the crown. No requell could be more 
unreafonable, or made at a more improper juncture. 
The queen replied, that Mary had once difcovered 
her intention not to wait for the fucceffion, but had 
openly, without ceremony or referve, aifumed the 
title of queen of England, and had pretended a fu- 
perlor right to her throne and kingdom : That 
though her ambaifadors, and thofe of her hufband, 
the French king, had figned a treaty, in which they 
renounced that claim, and promiied fatisfaction for 
fo great an indignity, Ihe was fo intoxicated with 
this imaginary right, that Ihe had rejected the moft 
earnelt folicitations, and even, as fome endeavoured 

t Jebb, vol. ii. p. 456» 

to 



ELIZABETH. s*f 

to perfuade her, had incurred fome danger in croiT- r: h a p. 
ing the feas, rather than ratify tha* equitable treaty : ^^^^1!^ 
That her partifans every where had ftill the af- 1561. 
furance to infiil on her title, and had prefumed 
to talk of her own birth as illegitimate : That 
while affairs were on this footing ; while a claim 
thus openly made, fo far from being openly 
renounced, was only fufpended till a more favour- 
able opportunity, it would, in her, be the moft 
egregious imprudence to fortify the hands of a 
pretender to her crown, by declaring her the fuc- 
ceflbr : That no expedient could be worfe ima- 
gined for cementing friendfliip than fuch a de- 
claration ; and kings were often found to bear 
no good-will to their fucceflbrs, even though their *• 
own children ; much more when the connexion was 
lefs intimate, and when fuch caufe of difguft and 
jealoufy had already been given, and indeed was 
ftill continued, on the part of Mary : That though 
(he was willing, from the amity which fhe bore her 
kinfwoman, to afcribe her former pretenfions to 
the advice of others, by whofe direftion fhe was 
then governed ; her prefent refufal to relinquifli ♦ 
them could proceed only from her own prepof- 
feflions, and was a proof that fhe ftill harboured 
fome dangerous defigns againft her : That it was 
the nature of all men to be difgufted with the 
prefent, to entertain flattering views of futurity, 
to think their fervices ill rewarded, to exped:!; a 
better recompence from the fuccelTor ; and fhe 
fhould efteem herfelf fcarcely half a fovereign over 
the Englifh, if they faw her declare her heir, and 
arm her rival with authority againft her own repofe 
and fafety : That fhe knew the inconftant nature of 
the people ; fhe was acquainted with the prefent / 

divifions in religion ; fhe was not ignorant that the 
fame party which expefted greater favour during 
the reign of Mary, did alfo imagine that the^ title 

of 



58 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, of that princefs was fuperior to her own : That 
^_^^^_^^,.,,^ for her part, whatever claims were advanced, fhe 
a 56 1, w^as determined to live and die queen of England ; 
and after her death, it was the bufmefs of others 
to determine who had the bell: pretenfions, either 
by the laws, or by the right of blood, to the fuc- 
ceffion : That fhe hoped the claim of the queen 
of Scots would then be found folid ; and, con- 
sidering the injury which fhe herfelf had received, 
k was fuxiicient indulgence, if fhe promifed, ia 
the mean time, to do nothing which might, in 
any refpecl, weaken or invalidate it : And that 
Mary, if her title were really preferable, a point 
which, for her own part, flie had never inquired 
into, poii'eiTed all advantages above her rivals ; 
who, deftitute both of prefent power, and of all 
fupport by friends, would only expofe themfelves 
to inevitable ruin, by advancing any weak, or even 
doubtful, pret-enfions ". 

These vievvs of the queen were fo prudent and 
judicious, that there whs no likelihood of her ever 
departing from them : But that flie might put the 
matter to a fuller proof, flie offered to explain the 
words of the treaty of Edinburgh, fo as to leave no 
fufpicion of their excluding Mary^s right of fuc- 
ceffion "" ; and in this form flie again required her 
to ratify that treaty. Matters at lafl came to this 
ilTue, that Mary agreed to the propofal, and offered 
to renounce all prefent pretenfions to the crown of 
England, provided Elizabeth would agree to de- 
clare her the fuccelTor "". But fuch was the jealous 
character of this latter princefs, that fhe never 
would confent to flrengthen the interefl and au- 
thority of any claimant, by fixing the fuccefTion ; 
much lefs would fhe make this concefTion in favour 
of a rival queen, who pofTeffed fuch plaufible pre- 

u Buchanan, lib. xvii. c. 14.— 17. Camden, p. 385. Spotfwood, 
p. 180, i8j. ^ Ibid. p. 181. * Haynes, vol. i. p. 377. 

tenfions 



vernment 
iza. 



ELIZABETH. ^ 

tenfions for the prefent, and who, though fhe might chap. 
verbally renounce them, could eafily refume her ^^^^^'^' 
claim on the firft opportunity. Mary's propofal, ,^6, 
however, bore fo fpecious an appearance of equity 
and juftice, that Elizabeth, fenfible that realon 
would, by fuperficial thinkers, be deemed to lie 
entirely on that fide, made no more mention of 
the matier ; and, though fiirther conceffions were 
never made by either princefs, they put on all the 
appearances of a cordial reconciliation and friendihip 
with each other. 

The queen obferved that, even without her in- wife go 
terpofition, Mary was fufEciently depreffed by the ^f'^iJJ^"" 
mutinous fpirit of her own lubjecls ; and inftead of beth. 
giving Scotland, for the preient, any inquietude or 
diflurbance, (he employed herfelf, more ufefully 
and laudably, in regulating the affairs of her own 
kingdom, and promoting the happinefs of her peo- 
ple. She made fome progrefs in paying thofe great 
debts which lay upon the crown ; ifie regulatea the 
coni, which had been much debafed by her prede- 
ceifors ; fhe furnifhed her arfenals with great quan- 
tities of arms from Germany and other places ; en- 
gaged her nobility and gentry to imitate her example 
in this particular ; introduced into the kingdom 
the art of making gunpowder and brais cannon ; 
fortified her frontiers on the fide of Scotland ; made 
frequent reviews of the militia : encouraged agri- 
culture, by allowing a free exportation of corn ; 
promoted trade and navigation ; and lo much in- 
crealed the flapping of her kingdom, both by build- 
ing veiTels of force herieif, and fuggefting like un- 
dertakings to the merchants, that fhe was juffly 
flyled the reftorer of naval glory, and the queen of 
the northern feas *. The natural frugality of her 
temper, fo far from incapacitating her from thefe 

y Camden, p, 38?. Strype, vol, J. p. ajo, 336, 337. 

great 



^ HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, gieat entcrprifes, only enabled her to execute them 
X2KVI1I. ^^-jj^ greater certainty and fuccefs ; and all the world 
1561, ^"^'^ ^^ her conduct the happy efteds of a vigor- 
ous perfeverance in judicious and well-concerted 
projects. 

It is eafy to imagine that fo great a princefs, who 
enjoyed fuch fingular felicity and renown, would re- 
ceive propofals of marriage from every one that had 
any likelihood of fuccceding ; and though fhe had 
made fome public declarations in favour of a fnigle 
life, few believed that flie would perfevere for ever 
in that refolution. The archduke Charles, fecond 
fon of the emperor ""', as well as Cafimir, fon of the 
eleclor Palatine, made applications to her ; and as 
this latter prince profeffed the reformed religion, he 
thought himfelf on that account better entitled to 
fucceed in his addreifes. Eric king of Sweden, 
and Adolph duke of Holdein, were encouraged, by 
the fame views, to become fuitors : And the earl of 
Arran, heir to the crown of Scotland, was, by the 
ilates of that kingdom, recommended to her as a 
fuitable marriage. Even fome of her own fubjefts, 
though they did not openly declare their pretenfions, 
entertained hopes of fuccefs. The earl of Arundel, 
a perfon declining in years, but defcended from an 
ancient and noble family, as well as poiTefled of 
great riches, flattered himfelf with this profpeft ; as 
did alfo fir William Pickering, a man much efteemed 
for his pcrfonal merit. But the perfon moft likely 
to fucceed, was a younger fon of the late duke 
of Northumberland, lord Robert Dudley, who by 
means of his exterior qualities, joined to addrefs and 
flattery, had become, in a manner, her declared 
favourite, and had great influence in all her coun- 
fels. The lefs worthy he appeared of this diftindtion, 
the more w^as his great favour afcribed to fome vio* 

» Haynes, vol. i. p. 233. 

lent 



ELIZABETH. St 

]ent afFecllon, which could thus feduce the judg- chap. 
ment of this penetrating princefs ; and men long ^^^^^^][!^ 
expelled that he would obtain the preference above ,^6i, 
fo many princes and monarches. But the queen 
gave all thefe fuitors a gentle refnfal, which (till 
encouraged their purfuit ; and (he thought that flie 
Ihould the better attach them to her interefts if they 
were ftill allov.-cd to entertain hopes of fucceeding * 
in their pretenfions. It is alfo probable that this 
policy was not entirely free from a mixture of fe- 
male coquetry ; and that, though flie was deter- 
mined in her own mind never to fliare her power 
with any man, fhe was not dilpleafed with the 
courtihip, foli'citation, and profeflions of love, which 
the defire of acquiring fo valuable a prize procured 
her from all quarters,. 

What is mof!: fmgular In the conduft and cha- 
racter of Elizabeth is, that though fhe determined 
never to have any heir of her own body, flie was 
not only very averfe to fix any fucceflor to the 
crov/n ; but feems alfo to have refolved, as far as 
it lay in her power, that no one who had preten- 
fions to the fiiccellion fliould ever have any heirs or 
fucceflbrs. If the exclufion given by the will of 
Henry VIII. to the pofterity of Margaret queen 
of Scotland v\^as allowed to be valid, the right to 
-the crov;n devolved on the houfe of Suffolk ; and 
the lady Catherine Gray, younger filler to the lady 
Jane, was now the heir of that family. This lady 
had been married to lord Herbert, fon of the eari 
of Pembroke ; but having beeii divorced from that 
nobleman, flie made a private marriage with the 
earl of Hertford, fon of the protedor ; and her 
hufband, loon after confuramation, travelled into 
France. In a little time fne appeared to be preg- 
"nant, which fo enraged Elizabeth, that fhe threw 
her into the Tower, and fummoned Hertford to 
appear, in order to anfwer for his mifdemeanor. 
10 He 



6ij HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP. He made no fcruple of acknowledging the marriage, 
xxxviii. ^y|-jjch, though concluded without the queen's con- 
,^61. fent, was entirely fuitable to both parties ; and for 
this otFence he was alfo committed to the Tower. 
Elizabeth's feverity Hopped not here : She iflued 
a coinmifTion to inquire into the matter; and as 
Hertford could not, within the time limited, prove 
the nuptials by witneiTes, the commerce between 
him and his confort was declared unlawful, and 
their poflerity illegitimate.' They were dill de- 
tained in cuftody ; but by bribing their keepers, 
they found means to have farther intercourfe ; and 
another child appeared to be the fruit of their com* 
merce. This was a freih fource of vexation to the 
queen ; who made a fine of fifteen thoufand pounds 
be fet on Hertford by the ftar-chamber, and or- 
dered his confinement to be thenceforth more rigid 
and fevere. He lay in this condition for nine jears, 
till the death of his wife, by freeing Elizabeth from 
all fears, procured him his liberty \ This ex- 
treme feverity muft be accounted for, either by the 
unrelenting jealoufy of tie queen, who was afraid 
left a pretender to the luccefFion fhould acquire 
credit by having iifue ; or by her malignity, which, 
with ail her great qualities, made one ingredient in 
•• her character, and which led her to envy, in others, 
thofe natural pleafures of love and poflerity, of 
v/hich her own ambition and defire of dominion 
made her renounce all profped for herfelf. 

There happened, about this time, fome othef 
events in the royal family, where the queen's con- 
<iu6t was more laudable. Arthur Pole, and his bro- 
ther, nephews to the late cardinal, and defcended 
from the duke of Clarence, together with Anthony 
Fortefcue, who had mairied a fifter of thefe gen-< 

a Haynes, vol. i. p. 369. 378. 396. Camcien, p. 389, Heylin, 
p. 154. 

tlemen, 



ELIZABETH. ^^ 

tiemen, and fome other perfons, were brought to chap. 
their trial for intending to withdraw into France, ^xxviii. 
with a view of foliciting fuccours from the duke of , . 
Guife, of returning thence into Wales, and of pro- 
claiming Mary queen of England, and Arthur Pole 
duke of Clarence. They confefTed the indiftment, 
but aflerted, that they never meant to execute thefe 
projefts during the queen*s> life-time : Tliey had 
only deemed luch precautions requifite in cafe of 
her demife, which fome pretenders to judicial aftro- 
logy had affured them they mig'ht- with certainty 
look for before the year expired. They were con- 
demned by the jury ; but received a pardon from 
the queen's clemency ''. 

^ Strype, vol. i. p. 333. Heylin, p, 154. 



<f4 HISTORY OF ENGLAf^ 



CHAP. XXXIX. 



^ate of Europe (Sivil wars of France ■ 



Havre de Grace put in po/JeJJio7i of the Englifh - 

A parliament Havre lofi Affairs of Scot- 

land Tbe queen of Scots marries the earl of 

Darnley Confederacy againfi the Protefiants 

' Murder of Rizzio A parliament 

Murder of Darnley ^een of Scots marries 

Bothin'cl Infurredicns in Scotland Im- 

prifonment of Mary — • — Mary flies int6 England 
Conferences at Tork, Und Hampton-Court* 



CHAP. A FTER the cominencemeht of the religious 
'^^^'^^- f\ wars in France, which rendered that flou* 
rifliing kingdom, during the courfe of near forty 
years, a fcene of horror and devaflation, the great 
rival powers in Europe were Spain and England ; 
and it was not long before an animofity, firft politi- 
cal, then perfonal, broke out between the fovereigns 
of thefe countries. 

Philip II. of Spain, though he reached not any 
enlarged views of policy, was endowed with great 
induflry and fagacity, a remarkable caution in his 
enteiprifes, an unufual forefight in all his meafures ; 
and as he was ever cool and leemingly unmoved by 
palTion, and poflefled neither talents nor inclination 
for war, both his fubjecls and his neighbours had 
reafon to expeft juftice, happinefs, and tranquillity, 
from his adminiftration. But prejudices had on 
him as pernicious efie(5ts as ever paflion had on any 
other monarch ; and the fpirit of bigotry and ty- 
ranny 




ELIZABETH. 65 

ranny by which he was a6tuated, with the fraudulent CHAP, 
maxims which governed his counfels, excited the yfll^^i5\ 
mofl violent agitation among his own people, en- j^^j, 
gaged him in acts of the mofl enormous cruelty, 
and threw all Europe into combuftion. 

After Philip had concluded peace at Cateau- 
Cambrefis, and had remained fome time in the 
Netherlands, in order to fettle the affairs of that 
country, he embarked for Spain ; and as the gravity 
of that nation, with their refpeftful obedience to 
their prince, had appeared more agreeable to his 
humour than the homely familiar manners and the 
pertinacious liberty of the Flemings, it was expe6t§d 
that he would, for the future, refide altogether at 
Madrid, and would govern all his extenfive domi- 
nions by Spanifh minifters and Spanifh counfels. 
Having met with a violent tempefl on his voyage, 
he no fooner arrived in harbour than he fell on his 
knees ; and, after giving thanks for his deliverance, 
he vowed that his life, which was thus providentially 
faved, fhould thenceforth be entirely devoted to the 
extirpation of herefy ". His fubfequent conduct 
correfponded to thefe profefTions. Finding that the 
nev/ doctrines had penetrated into Spain, he let loofe 
the rage of perfecution againil all who profelied 
them, or were fufpetted of adhering to them; and 
by his violence he gave new edge, even to the 
ufual cruelty of priefts and inquifitors. He threv^r 
into prifon Conftantine Ponce, who had been con- 
feffor to his father, the emperor Charles ; who had 
attended him during his retreat ; and in whofe arms 
that great monarch had terminated his life : And after 
this ecclefiaftic died in confinement, he flill ordered 
him to be tried and condemned for herefy, and his 
ftatue to be committed to the flames. He even 
deliberated whether he Ihould not exerclfe like fe- 
verity againfl the memory of his father, who was fuC- 

* Thuanus, lib. xxiil. c;ip. 14. 

Vol. V. F peded, 



66 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP. pe«fted, during his liitcr years, to have indulged a 
,^^^J^^ propenfity towards the Lutheran principles : In his 
t^Cz. unrelenting zeal for orthodoxy, he ipared neither 
age, lex, nor condition : He was preient, with an 
inflexible countenance, at the mofl barbarous exe- 
cutions : He iffued rigorous orders for the profecu- 
tion of heretics in Spain, Italy, the Indies, and the 
Low Countries : And, having founded his deter- 
mined tyranny on maxims of civil policy, as well 
as on principles of religion, he made it apparent 
to all his fubjedts, that there was no method, ex- 
cept the mofl entire compliance, or mod obftinate 
refiftance, to efcape or elude the feverity of his 
vengeance. 

During that extreme animofity which prevailed 
between the adherents of the oppofite religions, the 
civil magidrate, who found it difficult, if not im- 
poffible, for the fame laws to govern fuch enraged 
adverfaries, was naturally led, by fpecious rules of 
prudence, in embracing one party, to declare war 
againft the other, and to exterminate, by fire and 
fword, thofe bigots, who, from abhorrence of his 
religion, had proceeded to an oppofition of his 
power, and to a hatred of his perfon. If any prince 
poiTefled fuch enlarged views as to forefee that a 
inutual toleration would in time abate the fury of 
religious prejudices, he yet met with difficulties in 
reducing this principle to pradice ; and might deem 
the malady too violent to await a remedy which, 
though certain, mull neceffarily be flow in its ope- 
ration. But Philip, though a profound hypocrite, 
and extremely governed by felf-interefl, feems alfo 
to have been himfelf actuated by an imperious bi- 
gotry ; and, as he employed great reflexion in all 
his conduft, he could eafily palliate the gratification 
of his natural temper under the colour of wifdom, 
and find, in this fyftem, no lefs advantage to his 
foreign than his domeflic politics. By placing him- 
felf at the head of the catholic party, he converted 

the 



ELIZABETH. 67 

the zealots of the ancient faith into partifans of c tt a P, 
Spanifh greatnefs ; and by employing the powerful ,J^^^^i^ 
allurement of religion, he feduced every where the ,^6a. • 
fubjeds from tliat allegiance which they owed to 
their native fovereign. 

The courfe of events, guiding and concurring 
with choice, had placed Elizabeth in a fituation 
diametrically oppofite ; and had raifed her to be the 
glory, the bulwark, and the fupport of the nu- 
merous, though ftill perfecuted, protellants through- 
out Europe. More moderate in her temper than 
Philip, file found, with pleafure, that the principles 
of her fe61 required not fuch extreme feverity in her 
domeftic government as was exercifed by that mo- 
narch; and having no objed but felf-prefervation, 
file united her interefts in all foreign negotiations 
with thofe who were every where ftruggling under 
opprelTion, and guarding themfelves againft ruin 
and extermination. The more, virtuous fovereign 
was thus happily thrown into the more favourable 
caufe ; and fortune, in this inlfance, concurred with 
policy and nature. 

During the hfe-time of Henry II. of France, 
and of his fucceifor, the force of thefe principles was 
fomewhat retrained, though not altogether over- 
come, by motives of a fuperior intereft ; and the 
dread of uniting England with the French monar- 
chy, engaged Philip to maintain a good correfpond- 
ence with Elizabeth. Yet even during this pe- 
riod he rejeded the garter which fhe fent him ; he 
refufed to ratify the ancient league between the 
houfe of Burgundy and England''; he furnifhed 
fhips to tranfport French forces into Scotland ; he 
endeavoured to intercept the earl of Arran, who ^ 

was haftening to join the malcontents in that coun- 
try ; and the queen's wifefl minifters flill regarded 

d Digcres's Complete Ambaffador, p. 369. Haynes, p. 58c. Stryre, 
vol. iv. No. 446, *^ -> J ^ • ' 

F 2 his 



68 , HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

c HAP. his friendfliip as hollow and precarious ^ But no 
XXXIX. fQ(^p^ej. ^[^ fhg death of Francis 11. put an end to 
i56z. Philip's apprehenfions with regard to Mary's fuc- 
celiion, than his animofity againft Elizabeth began 
more openly to appear ; and the interefts of Spain 
and thofe of England weie found oppofitc in every 
negotiation and tranfadion. 

The two great monarchies of the continent, 
France and Spain, being pofleffed of nearly equal 
force, were naturally antagonifts ; and England, 
from its power and fituation, was entitled to fupport 
its own dignity, as well as tranquillity, by holding 
the balance between them. Whatever incident, 
therefore, tended too much to deprefs one of thefe 
rival powers, as it left the other without control, 
might be deemed contrary to the interefts of 
England ; yet fo much were thefe great maxims of 
policy over-ruled, during that age, by the difputes 
of theology, that Philip found an advantage in fup- 
porting the eftabhflied government and religion of 
France ; and Elizabeth in prote6ling faftion and 
innovation. 
Civil wars Th£ quecn-regent of France, when reinftated in 
of Fiance, g^^^-hority by the death of her fon, Francis, had 
formed a plan of adminiftration more fubtle than 
judicious ; and, balancing the cathoHcs with the 
hugonots, the duke of Guife with the prince of 
Conde^ ihe endeavoured to render herfelf neceflary 
to both, and to eftablifh her own dominion on their 
conftrained obedience ^ But the equal counterpoife 
of power, which, among foreign nations, is the 
fource of tranquillity, proves always the ground of 
quarrel between domeftic fliclions ; and if the ani- 
mofity of religion concur with the frequent occafions 
ivhich prefent themfelves of mutual injury, it is im- 
pofTible, during any time, to preferve a firm con- 
cord in fo delicate a fituation. The conftable, 

e Hayncs, vol. i. \>. 280, z?i. 283, 284,. ^ Davila, lib. ii. 

9 Montmo- 



ELIZABETH. 69 

Montmorency, moved by zeal for the ancient faith, chap. 
joined hhnfelf to the duke of Guife : The king of ^^^^i^ 
Navarre, from his inconftant temper, and his jea- 1362. 
ioufy of the fupexior genius of his brother, embraced 
the fame party : And Catherine, finding herfelf de- 
preifed by this combination, had recourfe to Conde 
and the huo;on.ots, who gladly embraced the oppor- 
tunity of fortifying themfelves by her countenance 
and protedion^. An edict had been publiflied, 
granting a toleration to the proteflants ; but the in- 
terelled violence of the duke of Guife, covered with 
the pretence of religious zeal, broke through this 
agreement ; and the two parties, after the fallacious 
tranquillity of a moment, renewed their mutual in- 
fults and injuries. Conde, Coligni, Andelot, affem- 
bled their friends, and flew to arms : G jife and 
Montmorency got polTefiion of the king's perfon, and 
conflrained the queen-regent to embrace their party : 
Fourteen armies were levied and put in motion in 
different parts of France ^ : Each province, each city, 
each family, was agitated with intefline rage and ani- 
mofity. The father was divided againft the fon ; 
brother againft brother ; and women themfelves, fa- 
crificing their humanity as well as their timidity to the 
religious fury, diftinguiflied themfelves by acls of 
ferocity and valour '. Wherever the hugonots pre- 
vailed, the images were broken, the altars pillaged, 
the churches demohfhed, the monafteries confumed 
with fire : Where fuccefs^ attended the catholics, 
they burned the bibles, re-baptized the infants, 
conflrained married perfons to pafs anew through 
the nuptial ceremony : And plunder, defolation, and 
bloodlhed attended equally the triumph of both par- 
ties. The parliament of Paris itielf, the feat of law 
and juftice, inftead of employing its authority to 
compofe thefe fatal quarrels, publifhed an edidt by 
which it put the fword into the hands of the enraged 

e Davila, lib. iii. h Father Paul, lib. vii. » Ibid. 

F 3 multitude^ 



70 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, multitude, and empowered the catholics every where 
^^^^i^^ to mafiacre the hugonots" : And it was during this 
>56s. period, when men began to be fomewhat enlightened, 
and in this nation, renowned for polifhed manners, 
that the theological rage, which had long been boil- 
ing in men's veins, feems to have attained its laft ftage 
of virulence and ferocity. 

Philip, jealous of the progrefs which the hugo- 
nots made in France, and dreading that the conta- 
gion would fpread into the Lov/ Country provinces, 
had formed a fecret alliance with the princes of 
Guife, and had entered into a mutual concert for 
the protection of the ancient faith, and the fup- 
preffion of herefy. He now fent fix thoufand men, 
with fome fupply of money, to reinforce the cathohc 
party ; and the prince of Conde, finding himfelf un- 
equal to fo great a combination, countenanced by 
the royal authority, was obliged to difpatch the Vi- 
dame of Chartres and Briguemaut to London, in 
order to crave the aiTiftance and protection cf Eli^ 
zabeth. Mod of the province of Normandy was 
Havre de poiTelTed by the hugonots : And Conde offered to 
Grace put put Havrc dc Grace into the hands of the Englifli ; 
ion'o'f'th ^^ condition that, together with three thoufand men 
Enghfh. for the garrifon of that place, the queen fhould hke-^ 
wife fend over three thoufand to defend Dieppe and 
Rouen, and fhould furnifh the prince with a fupply 
of a hundred thoufand crowns K 

Elizabeth, befides the general and efTential in- 
terefl of fupporting the proteft ants, and oppofing the 
rapid progreis of her enemy the duke of Guife, had 
other motives which engaged her to accept of this 
propofal. When fhe concluded the peace at Cateau- 
Cambrefis, fhe had good reafon to forefee that France; 
never would voluntarily fulfil the article which re- 
garded the reifitution of Calais ; and many fubfe- 
quent incidents had tended to confirm this fufpicion. 
Confiderable funis of money had been expended on 

^ Father Paul, lil). vii. Hayiies, p. 391. - Forbes, vol. ii. p. 4-8. 

the 



ELIZABETH. 71 

the fortifications ; long leafes had been granted of c HAP. 
the lands ; and many inhabitants had been en- ^^^.^^J^ 
couraged to build and fetile there, by aflurances that ,5^)2. 
Calais fhould never be reftored to the Enghfh '". 
The queen therefore wifely concluded, that, could 
file get pofTefTion of Havre, a place which com- 
manded the mouth of the Seine, and was of greater 
importance than Calais, fhe fhould eafily conflrain 
the French to execute the treaty, and fliould have 
the glory of reftoring to the crown that ancient pof^ 
fefTion, fo much the favourite of the nation. 

No meafure could be more generally odious in 
France, than the conclufion of this treaty with Eli- 
zabeth. Men were naturally led to compare the 
conduct of Guife, who had finally expelled the 
EngUfh, and had debarred thefe dangerous and de- 
ilruclive enemies from all accefs into France, with 
the treafonable politics of Conde, who had again 
granted them an entrance into the heart of the king- 
dom. The prince had the more reafon to repent of 
this meafure, as he reaped not from it all the ad- 
vantage which he expected. Three thoufand Eng- 
lifh immediately took pofTeilion of Havre and 
Dieppe, under the command of fir Edward Poinings ; 
but the latter place was found fo little capable of 
defence, that it was immediately abandoned ". The 
fiege of Rouen was already formed by the ca- 
thoHcs, under the command of the king of Navarre 
and Montmorency ; and it was with difficulty that 
Poinings could throw a fmall reinforcement into the 
place. Though thefe Englifli troops behaved with 
gallantry % and though the king of Navarre was 
mortally wounded during the fiege, the catholics flill 
continued the attack of the place, and carrying it at 
lafh by affault, put the whole garrifon to the fword. 
The earl of Warwic, eldeft fon of the late duke of 
Northumberland, arrived foon after at Havre with 

«. Forbes, p. 54. 457. " Ibid. vol. ii. p. 199. « Ibid. p. 161. 

F 4 another 



72 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, another body of three thoufand Englifli, and took 
XXXIX. Qj-^ j^jp^-^ |.]^g command of the place. 

J 562. I'^ ^^'^^ expefted that the French catholics, fiufhed 

with their fuccefs at Rouen, would immediately 
have formed the fiege of Havre, which was not as 
yet in any condition of defence ; but the inteftine 
diforders of the kingdom foon diverted their atten- 
tion to another enterprife. Andelot, feconded by 
the negotiations of Elizabeth, had levied a con- 
fiderable body of proteftants in Germany ; and 
having arrived at Orleans, the feat of the hugonots' 
power, he enabled the prince of Conde and the 
admiral to take the field, and oppofe the progrefs of 
their enemies. After threatening Paris during 
fome time, they took their march towards Nor- 
mandy with a view of engaging the Englifh to aft , 
in conjunftion with them, and of fortifying them- 
felves by the farther affiflance which they expected 
from the zeal and vigour of Elizabeth ''. The ca- 
tholics, commanded by the conftable, and under 
him by the duke of Guife, followed on their rear ; 
and, overtaking them at Dreux, obliged them to 
give battle. The field was fought with great obfti- 
nacy on both fides: And the aftion was diftin- 
guiihed by this fmgular event, that Conde and 
Montmorency, the commanders of the oppofite 
armies, fell both of them prifoners into the hands 
of their enemies. The appearances of victory re- 
mained with Guife ; but the admiral, whofe fate it 
ever was to be defeated, and ftill to rife more ter- 
rible after his misfortunes, collefted the remains of 
the army ; and infpiring his own unconquerable 
courage and conftancy into every breaft, kept them 
in a body, and fubdued fome confiderable places in 
Normandy. Elizabeth, the better to fupport his 
caufe, fent him a new fupply of a hundred thoufand 
crowns ; and ofiered, if he could find merchants to 

P Forbes, p. 320. Davila, lib. iii. 

lend 



ELIZABETH. 73 

lend him the money, to give her bond for another c h A p. 
fum of equal amount *^. xxxix. 

The expences incurred by afiifting the French ^^ 
hugonots had emptied the queen's exchequer ; and, Jhu. ii. 
in order to obtain fupply, fhe found herfeif under [^^^^JJ^'j 
a neceflity of fummoning a parliament : An expe- 
dient to which fhe never willingly had recourfe. 
A little before the meeting of this afiembly fhe 
. had fallen into a dangerous illnefs, the fmall-pox ; 
and as her life, during fome time, was defpaired 
of, the people became the more fenfible of their 
perilous fuuation, derived from the uncertainty 
which, in cafe of her demife, attended the fucceflion 
of the crown. The partifans of the queen of Scots, 
and thofe of the houfe of Suffolk, already divided 
the nation into factions ; and every one forefavir, 
that, though it might be polTible at prefent to de- 
termine the controverfy by law, yet, if the throne 
were vacant, nothing but the fword would be able 
to fix a fucceifor. The commons, therefore, on the 
opening of the feflion, voted an addrefs to the 
queen ; in which, after enumerating the dangers at- 
tending a broken and doubtful fucceffion, and men- 
tioning the evils which their fathers had experienced 
from the contending titles of York and Lancafter, 
they entreated the queen to put an end to their 
apprehenfions, by choofing fome hufband, whom, 
they promifed, whoever he were, gratefully to re- 
ceive, and faithfully to ferve, honour, and obey^ 
Or, if fhe had entertained any reluctance to the 
married ftare, thev defired that the lawful fucceifor 
might be named, at leail appointed by a6t of par- 
liament. They remarked that, during all the reigns 
which had paffed fince the conquefl, the nation had 
never before been fo unhappy as not to know the 
perfon who, in cafe of the fovereign's death, was 

9 Forbes, vol. il. p. 312. 3+7. 

legally 



54 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP. legally entitled to fill the vacant throne. And they 

^^^}^ obferved, that the fixed order which took place in 

j^^jj^ inheriting the French monarchy,, was one chief 

fource of rhe ufual tranquillity, as well as of the 

happinefs of that kingdom ^ 

This fubjed, though extremely interelling to 
* the nation, was very little agreeable to the queen ; 
and fhe was fenfible that great difficulties would 
attend every decifion. A declaration in favour of 
the queen of Scots would form a fettlement per- 
fectly legal ; becaufe that princefs was commonly 
allowed to pofiefs the right of blood ; and the ex- 
clufion given by Henry's will, deriving its weight 
chiefly from an act of parliament, v»^ould lofe all 
authority, whenever the queen and parliament had 
made a new fettlement, and reflored the Scot- 
tifli line to its place in the fuccefTion. But fhe 
dreaded giving encouragement to the catholics, her 
fecret enemies, by this declaration. Sfie was fen- 
fible that every heir was, in fome degree, a rival ; 
much more one who enjoyed a claim for the pre- 
fent poifeffion of the crown, and who had already 
advanced, in a very open manner, thefe dangerous 
pretenfions. The great power, of Mary, both from 
the favour of the catholic princes, and her connec- 
tions with the houfe of Guife, not to mention the 
force and fituation of Scotland, was well known to 
her ; and flie faw no fecurity that this princefs, if 
fortified by a fure profpeft of fucceflion, would not 
revive claims v/hich Ihe could never yet be pre- 
vailed on formally to rehnquifh. On the other 
hand, the title of the houfe of Suffolk was fup- 
ported by the more zealous proteflants only ; and it 
was very doubtful, whether even a parliamentary 
declaration in its favour would beftow on it fuch 
validity as to give fatisfadion to the people. The 

^ Sir Simon D'Ewes's Journ. y. 8i. 

repub« 



ELIZABETH. 



7S 



Tepublican part of the conflitution had not yet ac- c h A. p. 
quired luch an afcendant as to control, in any x^^xix. 
degree, the ideas of hereditary right ; and, as the ^TlgT**^ 
legality of Henry's will was Hill difputed, though 
founded on the utmoft authority which a parliament 
could confer ; who could be aflured that a more 
recent a6b would be acknowledged to have greater 
validity ? In the frequent revolutions which had 
of late taken place, the right of blood had dill 
prevailed over religious prejudices ; and the nation 
had ever fliewn itfelf difpofed rather to change its 
faith than the order of fucceffion. Even many pro- 
teftants declared themfelves in favour of Mary's 
claim of inheritance ^ ; and nothing would occafion 
more general difguft, than to fee the queen, openly 
and without referve, take part againll it. The 
Scottifh princefs alfo, finding herfelf injured in fo 
fenhble a point, would thenceforth a6l as a declared 
enemy ; aud uniting together her foreign and do- 
jneftic friends, the partifans of her prefent title and 
of her eventual fucceffion, would foon bring matters 
to extremities againll the prefent eftablifliment. The 
queen, weighing all thefe inconveniencies, which 
were great and urgent, was determined to keep 
both parties in awe, by maintaining dill an am- 
biguous conduft ; and fhe rather chofe that the 
people fhould run the hazard of contingent events, 
than that flie herfelf fhould vifibly endanger her 
throne, by employing expedients, which, at beft, 
would not beftow entire fecurity on the nation. 
She gave, therefore, an evafive anfwer to the ap- 
plications of the commons ; and when the houfe, at 
the end of the feffion, defired, by the mouth of their 
fpeaker, farther fatisfadion on that head, fhe could 
Tiot be prevailed on to make her reply more ex- 
plicit. She only told them, contrary to her decla- 
rations in the beginning of her reign, that fhe had 

^ Keith, p, }»x. 

fixed 



r6 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, fixed no ab folate refolutioii againft marriage ; and 
?^^^]^ fl"^e added, that the difficulties attending the queflion 
' 1563. of ^^s fucceinon were fo great, that ilie would be 
contented, for the fake of her people, to remain 
fcir.e tiine long^er in this vale of miferv ; and never 
fliould depart Hfe with fatisfaftion, till flie had laid 
feme foHd foundation for their future fecurity \ 

The mofl remarkable law pafled this felTion, was 
that which bore the title of Affurance of the quecn^s 
royal power over oil Jlaies and fubjeds within her 
dominiom ". By this aft, the alTerting twice, by 
writing, word, or deed, the pope's authority, was 
fubjecled to the penalties of treafon. All perfons in 
holy orders were bound to take the oath of fu- 
premacy ; as alfo all who were advanced to any 
degree, either in the univerfities or in common law ; 
all fchool-mafters. officers in court, or members of 
parliament : And the penalty of their fecond refufal 
was treafon. The firft offence, in both cafes, was 
punifhed by banifhment and forfeiture. This ri- 
gorous ftatute was not extended to any of the de- 
gree of a baron ; becaufe it was not fuppofed that 
the queen could entertain any doubt with regard to 
the fidelity of perfons poffeffed of fuch high dignity. 
Lord Montacute made oppofition to the bill ; and 
alTerted, in favour of the catholics, that they dif- 
puted not, they preached not, they difobeyed not 
the queen, they caufed no trouble, no tumults 
among the people"'. It is however probable that 
fome fufpicions of their fecret confpiracies had made 
the queen and parliament increafe their rigour 
againft them ; though it is alfo more than probable 
that they were miflaken in the remedy. 

There was likewife another point, in which the 
parliament, this feffion, fhewed more the goodnefs 
cf their intention, than the foundnefs of their judg- 
ment. They puffed a law againff fond and fantaflical 

' Sir Simon D'Ewcs's Journal, p. 75. " 5 Eliz. c, i. 

* Stiyi)ej vol. i. p. a6o. 

pro- 



ELIZABETH. 77 

toraphecies, which had been obferved to feduce the C hap. 
people into rebellion and dilbrder "" : But at the fame ^^^jllTI^ 
rime they enacted a flatute, which was mod likely ,563. 
to increafe thefe and fuch like luperflitions : It was 
levelled againft conjurations, enchantments, and 
witchcraft ^'. Witchcraft and herefy are two crimes, 
which commonly increafe by punifhment, and never 
are fo effedually fuppreffed as by being totally ne- 
gledled. After the parliament had granted the 
queen a fupply of one fubfidy, and two fifteenths, 
the feffion was finifhed by a prorogation. The con- 
vocation likewife voted the queen a fubfidy of fix 
fhilhngs in the pound, payable in three years. 

While the Englifli parties exerted thefe calm 
efforts againfl each other, in parliamentary votes 
and debates, the French factions, enflamed to the 
highefl degree of animofity, continued that cruel 
war, which their intemperate zeal, aftuated by the 
ambition of their leaders, had kindled in the Idng- 
dom. The admiral was fuccefsful in reducing the 
towns of Normandy which held for the king ; but 
he frequently complained, that the numerous gar- 
rifon of Havre remained totally inactive, and was 
not employed in any miHtary operation againfl the 
common enemy. The queen, in taking polTefTion 
of that place, had publifhed a manifefto ^, in which 
flie pretended, that her concern for the interefls of 
the French -king had engaged her In that meafure, 
and that her fole intention was to oppofe her enemies 
of the houfe of Guife, who held their prince in cap- 
tivity, and employed his power to the deftruftion of 
his befl and mofl faithful fubjefts. It was chiefly 
her defire to preferve appearances^ joined to the 
great frugality of her temper, which made her, at 
this critical juncture, keep her foldiers in garrifon, 
and reflrain them from committing farther hofiilities 

* SEliz. c. 15. f Ibid. c. iC. * Farbes, vo!. il. 

upon 



^8 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, upon the enemy *. The duke of Guife, meanwhile, 
XXXIX. ^^g aiming a mortal blow at the power of the hu- 
,5 gonots ; and had commenced the fiege of Orleans, 
of which Andelot was governor, and where the 
conftable was detained prifoner. He had the pro- 
fpecl of fpeedy fuccefs in this undertaking ; when 
he was afTallmated by Poltrot, a young gentleman, 
whofe zeal, inftigated (as is pretended, though with- 
out any certain foundation) by the admiral, and 
Beza, a famous preacher, led him to attempt that 
criminal enterprife. The death of this gallant prince 
was a fenfible lofs to the catholic party ; and though 
the cardinal of Lorraine, his brother, ftill fupported 
the interefts of the family, the danger of their pro- 
grefs appeared not fo imminent either to Elizabeth 
or to the French proteflants. The union, therefore, 
between thefe allies, which had been cemented by 
their common fears, began thenceforth to be lefs 
intimate ; and the leaders of the hugonots were 
perfuaded to hearken to terms of a feparafe accom- 
modation. Conde and Montmorency held confer- 
ences for fettling the peace ; and as they were both 
of them impatient to relieve themfelves from cap- 
tivity, they foon came to an agreement with regard 
to the conditions. The character of the queen- 
regent, whofe ends were always violent, but who en- 
deavoured, by fubtlety and policy, rather than force, 
to attain them, led her to embrace any plaufiible 
terms ; and, in fpite of the proteftations of the ad- 
miral, whofe fagacity could eafily difcover the trea- 
chery of the court, the articles of agreement were 
finally fettled between the parties. A toleration, 
under fome reftriftions, was anew granted to the 
proteflants; a general amnefly was pubhfhed; Conde 
was reinftated in his offices and governments ; and 
after money was advanced for the payment of ar- 

» Forbes, vol. ii. p. zj6, 277, 

1 1 rears 



ELIZABETH. 79 

rears due to the German troops, they were difmifled chap, 
the kingdom. ^ ^^^^^^ 

By the agreement between Elizabeth and the ,^^j^ 
prince of Conde it had been ftipulated ^^ that neither 
party (hould conclude peace without the confent of 
the other ; but this article was at prefent but little 
regarded by the leaders of the French proteftants. 
They only comprehended her fo far in the treaty, 
as to obtain a promife, that, on her reiinquifliing 
Havre, her charges, and the money which (he had 
advanced them, fliould be repaid her by the king 
of France, and that Calais, on the expiration of 
the term, fhould be reftored to her. But Ihe dif- 
dained to accept of thefe conditions ; and thinking 
the poiTeffion of Havre a much better pledge for 
effefting her purpofe, (he fent Warwic orders to 
prepare himfelf againft an attack from the now 
united power of the French monarchy. 

The earl of Warwic, who commanded a garrlfon 
of fix thoufand men, befides feven hundred pioneers, 
had no fooner got poffefTion of Flavre, than he em- 
ployed every means for putting it in a pofture of 
defence " ; and after expelling the French from the 
town, he encouraged his foldiers to make the mofl 
defperate defence againft the enemy. The conftable 
commanded the French army ; the queen-regent 
herfelf, and the king, were prefent in the camp ^ 
even the prince of Conde joined the king's forces, 
and gave countenance to this enterprife ; the ad- 
miral and Andelot alone, anxious llill to preferve 
the friendihip of Elizabeth, kept at a diftance, and 
prudently refufed to join their ancient enemies in 
an attack upon their allies. 

From the force, and difpofirions, and fituations 
of both fides, it was expelled that the fiege would 
be attended with fome memorable event : vet did 
France make a much eafier acquifition of this im- 

> Forbes, vol, ii. p. 79, « Ibid, p, 15?. 

portant 



8o HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, portant place, than was at firft apprehended. The 
XXX IX. plague creeped in among the EngUih foldiers ; and 
1563 being increafed by their fatigue and bad diet (for 
they were but ill fupplied with provifions **), it made 
fuch ravages, that fometimes a hundred men a day 
died of it, and there remained not at laft fifteen 
hundred in a condition to do duty % The French, 
meeting with fuch feeble refiflance, carried on their 
attacks fuccefsfully ; and having made two breaches, 
eagh of them fixty feet wide, they prepared for a 
general affault, which mud have terminated in the 
flaughter of the whole garrifon^ Warwic, who 
had frequently warne'd the Englifli council of the 
danger, and who had loudly demanded a fupply 
Havre loft, of men and provifions, found himfelf obliged to ca- 
»sth July, pitulate, and to content himfelf with the liberty of 
withdrawing his garrifon. The articles were no 
fooner figned, than lord Clinton, the admiral, who 
had been detained by contrary winds, appeared off 
the harbour with a reinforcement of three thoufand 
men, and found the place furrendered to the ene- 
my. To, increafe the misfortune, the infefted army 
brought the plague with them into England, where 
it fwept off great multitudes, particularly in the 
city of London. Above twenty thoufand perfons 
there died of it in one year ^. 

Elizabeth, whofe ufual vigour and forefight 
had not appeared in this tranfaclion, was now glad 
to compound matters ; and as the queen-regent de- 
fired to obtain leifure, in order to prepare meafures 
for the extermination of the hugonots, fhe readily 
hearkened to any reafonable terms of accommo- 
dation with England \ It was agreed that the 
hoflages which the French had given for the refti- 
»d April, tution of Calais, fhould be reftored for 220,000 

•1 Forbes, vol. ii. p. 377. 49S. = Ibid. \i. 450. 4.i;8= 

f Iljidi p. 498. g See note [F] at the end of the volume. 

* Davila, lib. iii. 

, crowns j 



ELIZABETH* 8i 

crowns ; and that both fides fhould retam all their chap. 

XXXIX 

claims and pretenfioiis. ^_^^^^ 

The peace ftill continued with Scotland; and 1563. 
even a cordial friendfliip feemed to have been ce- ^^P!^"^ 
mented betv/een Elizabeth and Mary. Thefe ^ 
princefies made profeflion of the mofl entire af- 
fection ; wrote amicable letters every week to 
each other ; and had • adopted, in all appearance, 
the fentiments as well as ftyle of fillers. Elizabeth 
punilhed one Hales, who had publiflied a book 
againil: Mary^s title ' ; and as the lord keeper Bacon 
was thought to have encouraged Hales in this un- 
dertaking, he fell under her difpleafure, and it was 
with fome diiBculty he was able to give her fatif- 
faftion, and recover her favour ^. The two queens 
had agreed in the foregoing fummer to an in- 
terview at York ' ; in order to remove all diffi- 
culties with regard to Mary's ratification of the 
treaty of Edinburgh, and to confider of the proper 
method for fettling the fucceffion of England : But 
as Elizabeth carefully avoided touching on this de- 
licate fubjed, flie employed a pretence of the wars 
in France, which, Ihe faid, would detain her in 
London ; and fhe delayed till next year the in- 
tended interview. It is alfo probable, that, being 
well acquainted with the beauty and addrefs and 
accomplilhments of Mary, fhe did not chcofe to ftand ' 
the comparifon with regard to thofe exterior quali- 
ties, in which fire was eclipfed by her rival ; and 
was unwilling that a princefs, who had already made 
great progrefs in the efleem and affedions of the 
Englifli, fiiould have a farther opportunity of in- 
creafmg the number of her pai:ti{"ans. 

Mary's clofe conneftions with the houfe of 
Guife, and her devoted attachment to her uncles, by 
whom file had been early educated and conftantly 
protected, was the ground of jufl and infurmount- 

i Keith, p. 45a, k ibid. p. ajj. ' Ilaynes, p. 388. 

Vol. V, G able 



S2 iitStORY OF ENGLAND. 

XXXIX* ^^^^ jealoufy to Elizabeth, who regarded them ag 
%^^0m^^^mj^ her mortal and declared enemies, and was well ac- 
1363. quainted with their dangerous character and ambi- 
tious projefts. They had made offer of their niece 
to don Carlos, Philip's fon ; to the king of Sweden, 
the king of Navarre, the archduke Charles, the 
duke of Ferrara, the cardinal of Bourbon, who had 
only .taken deacon's orders, from which he might 
eafily be freed by a difpenfation ; and they were 
ready to marry her to any one who could flrengthen 
their interefts, or give inquietude and diflurbance 
to Elizabeth "*. Elizabeth on her part was equally 
vigilant to prevent the execution of their fchemes, and 
was particularly anxious, left Mary fhould form any 
powerful foreign alliance, which might tempt her to 
revive her pretenfions to the crown, and to invade 
the kingdom on the fide where it was weakeft and 
lay moft expofed ". As flie believed that the mar- 
riage with the archduke Charles was the one moft 
likely to have place, {he ufed every expedient to 
prevent it ; and befides remonftrating againft it to 
Mary herfelf, ftie endeavoured to draw off the arch- 
duke from that purfuit, by giving him fome hopes 
of fuccefs in his pretenfions to herfelf, and by in- 
viting him to a renewal of the former treaty of 
marriage °. She always told the queen of Scots, 
that nothing would fatisfy her but her efpoufing fome 
Englifh nobleman, who would remove all grounds 
of jealoufy, and cement the union between the king- 
doms ; and {he offered on this condition to have 
her title examined, and to declare her fuccelfor to 
the crown ■*. After keeping the matter in thefe 
general terms during a twelvemonth, flie at iaft 
named lord Robert Dudley, now created earl of 
Leicefter, as the perfon on whom fhe defired that 
Mary's choice diould fall. 

« Forbes, vol, ii. p. 25?7. Strype, vol.i, p. 4.00. " Keltli> 

p. *4.7. 284, • Meivil, p. 41. P Keith, p. 243. a49' 

259. a6j. 

Thb 



ELIZABETH, 83 

The earl of Leicefler, the great and powerful chap. 
favourite of Elizabeth, pofTeiTed ail thofe exterior ^^^^^i^ 
qualities which are naturally alluring to the fair fex; j^^j, ^ 
a handfome perfon, a polite addrefs, an infinuating 
behaviour ; and by means of thefe accompHOiments, 
he had been able to blind even the penetration of 
Elizabeth, and conceal from her the great defects, 
or rather odious vices, which attended his character. 
He was proud, infolent, interefted, ambitious ; 
without honour, without generofity, without hu- 
manity ; and atoned not for thefe bad qualities, by 
fuch abilities or courage, as could fit him for that 
high trufl and confidence, with which flie always 
honoured him. Her conftant and declared attach- 
ment to him had naturally emboldened him to afpire 
to her bed ; and in order to make way for thefe 
nuptials, he was unlverfally believed to have mur- 
dered, in a barbarous manner, his wife, the heirefs 
of one Robefart. The propofal of efpoufing Mary 
was by no means agreeable to him ; and he always 
afcribed it to the contrivance of Cecil, his enemy ; 
who, he thought, intended by that artifice to make 
him^lofe the friendlhip of Mary from the temerity 
of his pretenfions, and that of Elizabeth from jea- 
ioufy of his attachments to another woman '^. The 
queen herfelf had not any ferious intention of ef- 
fecting this marriage ; but as fhe was defirous that 
the queen of Scots fhould never have any hufband, ^ 

fhe named a man, who, fhe believed, was not 
likely to be accepted of; and (he hoped, by that 
means, to gain time, and elude the project of any 
other alliance. The earl of Leicefter was too great > 
a favourite to be parted with ; and when Mary, al- 
lured by the profpedt of being declared fucceffor to 
the crown, feemed at lafl to hearken to Elizabeth's 
propofal, this princefs" receded from her offers, and 

S Camden, p. 395. 

Q 3 withdrew 



S4 , HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

xxyty' w^t^i^^^^^^ t^^ bait which fhe had thrown out to her 

^^^^...y^^^^ rival '. This diiphcity of condud, joined to fome 

JJ63. appearance of an imperious fuperiority, aflumed by 

her, had drawn a peevifh letter from Mary ; and 

the feemingly amicable correfpondence between the 

two queens was, during fome time, interrupted. 

' In order to make up the breach, the queen of Scots 
difpatched fir James Melvil to London ; who has 
giyen us in his memoirs a particular account of his 
negotiation. 

Melvil was an agreeable courtier, a man of ad- 
drefs and converfation ; and it was recommended to 
him by his miftrefs, tha^ befides grave reafonings, 
concerning politics and ftate-affairs, he fhould in- 
troduce more entertaining topics of converfation, 
fuitable to the fprightly charafter of Elizabeth ; and 
fhould endeavour by that means to infinuate him- 
felf into her confidence. He fucceeded fo well, 
that he threw that artful princefs entirely off her 
guard ^ ; and made her difcover the bottom of her 
heart, full of all thofe levities and follies and ideas 
of rivalihip which polTefs the youngeft and moll 
frivolous of her fex. He talked to her of his tra- 
vels, and forgot not to mention the different drelTes 
of the ladies in- different countries, and the parti- 
cular advantages of each, in fetting off the beauties 
of the fbape and perfon. The queen faid, that fhe 
had dreffes of all countries ; and fhe took care thence- 
forth to meet the ambaflador every day apparelled 
in a different habit: Sometimes fhe was dreffed in 
the Englifli garb, fometimes in the French, fome- 

. times in the Italian; and fhe afked him, which of 
them became her moll ? He anfwered the Italian ; 
a reply that, he knew, would be agreeable to her, 
becaule that mode fhewed to advantage her flowing 
locks, which he remarked, though they were more 

r Ktitli, p. 169, 270. Appendix, p. 158. Strype, vol. i. p-4'4« 
s Haynes, p. 4+7. 

red 



ELIZABETH. 8^- 

red than yellow, fhe fancied to be the fineft in the c h a p. 
world. She defired to know of him what was re- ^^^1^ 
puted the beft colour of hair : She alked whether i^o^. 
his queen or fhe had the, fined hair : She even in- 
quired which of them he efteemed the fairefl perfon : 
A very delicate quellion, and which he prudently 
eluded, by faying, that her majefty was the fairefl 
perfon in England, and his miftrefs in Scotland. 
She next demanded which of them was tailed : He 
replied, his queen : Then is fhe too tall, faid Eliza- 
beth : For I myfelf am of a juft flature. Elaving 
learned from him, that his miftrefs fometimes re- 
created herfelf by playing on the harpfichord, an 
inflrument on which fhe herfelf excelled, flie gave 
orders to lord Hunfdon, that he fhould lead the 
ambaffador, as it were cafually, into an apartment, 
where he might hear her perform ; and when Mel- 
vil, as if ravillied' with the harmony, broke into the 
queen's apartment, fhe pretended to be difpleafed 
with his intrufion ; but ftill took care to afk him, 
whether he thought Mary or her the beft performer 
on that inflrument ' ? From the whole of her be- 
haviour, Melvil thought he might, on his return, , 
alfure his miftrefs, that fhe had no reafon ever to 
expect any cordial friendfhip from Elizabeth, and 
that all her profeflions of amity were full of falfehood 
and difTimulatlon. 

After two years had been, fpent in evafions' and 
artifices ", Mary's fubjefts and counfellors, and pro- 
bably herfelf, began to think it full time that fome 
marriage were concluded ; and lord Darnley, fon of 
the earl of Lenox, was the perfon in whom mofl 
men's opinions and wifhes centered. Fie was Mary's ' ' 
coufin german, by the lady Margaret Douglas, niece 
to Harry VII i. and daughter of the earl of Angus, 
by Margaret queen of Scotland. He had been 
boru and educated in England, where the earl of 

* Melvil, p. 49, jo. " Keith, p. 164., 

G 3 Leno3K 



S^ HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP. Lenox had conftantly refided, fince he had been ba* 
1^1^^^ nifhed by the prevailing power of the houfe of Ha^. 
J5<?4. milton : Arid as Darnley was now in his twentieth 
year, and was a very comely perfon, tall and delicately 
iliaped, it was hoped that he might foon rentier 
himfelf agreeable to the queen of Scots. He was 
alfo by his father a branch of the fame family with 
herfelf ; and would, in efpoufing her, preferve the 
royal dignity in the houfe of Stuart : He was, after 
her, next heir to the crown of England ; and thofe 
who pretended to exclude her on account of her be- 
ing a foreigner, had endeavoured to recommend his 
title, and give it the preference. It feemed no in- 
confiderable advantage, that fhe could, by marry- 
ing, unite both their claims ; and as he was by 
birth an Englifhman, and could not, by his power 
or alHances, give any ground of fufpicion to Eliza? 
beth, it was hoped that the propofal of this mar- 
riage would not be unacceptable to that jealous 
princefs. 

Elizabeth was well informed of thefe inten- 
tions "^ ; and was fecretly not difpleafed with the 
projected marriage between Darnley and the queen 
of Scots ". She would rather have wifhed that 
Mary had continued for ever in a fingle life : But 
finding little probability of rendering this fcheme 
eiFeftual, fhe was fatisfied with a choice which 
freed her at once from the dread of a foreign al- 
liance, and from the neceffity of parting with Lei- 
cefter, her favoufrite. In order to pave the way to 
Darnley's marriage, fhe fecretly defired Mary to 
invite Lenox into Scotland, to reverfe his attainder, 
and to reftore him to his honours and fortiAie ^, 
And when her requeft was complied with, flie took 
care, in order to preferve the friendfhip of the Ha- 
miltons and her other partifans in Scotland, to 
|)lame openly this conduct of Mary ^. Hearing 

^ Keith, p. i6i. ^ Ibid. p. 280. rZz. Jebb, vol. ii. 

p. 46. y heub, p. 255. 259. 271* 2 Melvi!, p. 42. 

that 



ELIZABETH. S7 

that the negotiation for Darnley's marriage ad- C H A p. 
vanced apace, flie gave that nobleman permifTion, v«^,-^^«^ 
on his firfl application, to follow his father into 1564, 
Scotland : But no fooner did fhe learn that the 
queen of Scots was taken with his figure and perfon, 
and that all meafures were fixed for efpoufing him, 
than fhe exclaimed againfl the marriage; fent Throg- 
inorton to order Darnley immediately, upon his 
allegiance, to return to England ; threw the countefs 
of Lenox and her fecond fon into the Tower, where 
they fuffered a rigorous confinement; feized all 
Lenox*s Englifh eflate ; and though it was impof- 
fible for her to afhgn one fingle reafon for her dif- 
pleafure % fhe menaced, and protefled, and com- aSth July, 
plained, as if fhe had fuffered the mofl grievous 
injury in the world. 

The politics of Elizabeth, though judicious, 
were ufually full of duplicity a|id artifice ; but never 
more fo than in her tranfaftions with the queen of 
Scots, where there entered fo many little paffions 
and narrow jealoufies, that fhe durfl not avow to 
the world the reafons of her conduft, fcarcely to her 
miniflers, and fcarcely even to herfelf. But befides 
a womanifh rivalfhip and envy againfl the marriage 
of this princefs, fhe had fome motives of interefl 
for feigning a difpleafure on the prefent occafion. 
It ferved her as a pretence for refufing to acknow- 
ledge Mary's title to the fucceffion of England ; 
a point to which, for good reafons, flie was deter- 
mined never to confent. And it was ufeful to her 
for a purpofe ftill more unfriendly and dangerous, 
for encouraging the difcontents and rebellion of the 
Scottifh nobility and ecclefiaftics ^ 

Nothing can be more unhappy for a people than 
to be governed by a fovereign attached to a religion 
different from the eflablifhed ; and it is fcarcely 
polTible that mutual confidence can ever, in fuch a ' 

» |C?ith, p. 274; 275. * Ibid. p. a90. 

Q 4 fituation% 



88 HISTO-RY OF ENGLA^ID. 

CHAP, fituation, have place between the prmce and his fub- 
^^^^,,..J^ jeds. Mary's conduct had been hitherto, in every 
ij6j. refpeft, unexceptionable, and even laudable •, yet 
had fhe not made fuch progrefs in acquiring popu- 
larity, as might have been expected froni her gra- 
cious deportment and agreeable accomplifhments. 
Sufpicions every moment prevailed on account of 
her attachment to the catholic faith, and efpecially 
to her uncles, the open and avowed promoters of 
the fcheme for exterminating the profefibrs of the 
reformed religion throughout all Europe. She ftill 
refufed to ratify the a6ts of parliament which had 
eitablifhed the reformation ; fhe made attempts for 
reftoring to the catholic bifhops fome part of their 
civil jurifdiction ' ; and fhe wrote a letter to the 
council of Trent, in which, befides profeffing her 
attachment to the catholic faith, fhe took notice of 
her title to fucceed to the crown of England, and 
expreifed her hopes of being able, in fome period, 
to brinsr back all her dominions to the bofom of the 

O 

church ^ The zealots among the proteftants were 
not wanting, in their turn, to exercife their info- 
lence againfl her, which tended ftill more to alienate 
her from their faith. A law was enacted, making 
it capital, on the very firft offence, to fay mafs any 
where, except in the queen's chapel ^ ; and it was 
with difficuity that even this fmall indulgence was 
granted her : The general aifembly importuned her 
anew to change her religion ; to renounce the blaf- 
phemous idolatry of the mafs, with the' tyranny of 
the Roman Antichrift ; and to embrace the true 
religion of. Chrift Jefus '. As flie anfwered v/ith 
temper, that fne was not- yet convinced of the 
falfity of her rehgion, cr the impiety of the mafs ; 
and • that her apoltacy .would lofe her the friend- 
fliip of her aUies on the continent ; they replied, 

' S|>otfwooJ, 0.198. '' Father Paul, lib. vii, * Keitli, 

^p. 268, . f ibid. p. 545. Knox, p. 37.1.. 

5 by 



ELIZABETH. 89 

by affuring her, that their religion was undoubtedly ^^^ ^* 
the fame which had been revealed by Jefus Chrift, y^^,^^^,^ 
which had been preached by the apoftles, and which 1^65. 
had been embraced by the faithful in the primitive 
ages ; that neither the religion of Turks, Jews, nor 
Papifts was built on io folid a foundation as theirs ; 
that they, alone, of all the various fpecies of reli- 
gionifts fpread over the face of the earth, were fo 
happy as to be poiTelTed of the truth ; that thofe 
who hear, or rather who gaze on the mafs, allow 
facrilege, pronounce blafphemy, and commit mofl 
abominable idolatry ; and that the friendfhip of the 
King of kings was preferable to all the alliances in 
the world ^. 

The marriage of the queen of Scots had kindled The queen 
afrefh the zeal of the reformers, becaufe the family °^ ^":"'* 
of Lenox was believed to adhere to the catholic ,he eari of 
faith ; and though Darnley, who now bore the Damley. 
name of king Henry, went often to the eftabliflied 
church, he could not, by this exterior compliance, 
gain the confidence and regard of the ecclefiaftics. 
They rather laid hold of the opportunity to infult 
him to his face; and Knox fcrupled not to tell him 
from the pulpit, that God, for punifhment of th*e 
offences and ingratitude of the people, was wont to 
commit the rule over them to boys and women ^. 
The populace of Edinburgh, inftigated by fuch 
doctrines, began to meet and to affociate themfelves 
againft the government '. But what threatened 
more immediate danger to Mary's authority, were 
the difcon tents which prevailed among fome of the 
principal nobility. 

The duke of Chatelrault was difpleafed with the 
reftoration, and ffill more with the aggrandifement, 
of the family of Lenox, his hereditary enemies ; 
and entertained fears left his own eventual fucceflion 
to the crown of Scotland (hould be excluded by his 

s Keith, p. 550 551, S IbiJ. p. 546. Knox, p. 381, 

} Knox, p. 377, 

^ rival, 



90 



HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 



CHAP, rival, who had formerly advanced fome pretenfions 
/_^,^ to it. The earl of Murray found his credit at court 
3565. much diminifhed by the intereft of Lenox and his 
fon ; and began to apprehend the revocation of fome 
confiderable grants, which he had obtained from 
Mary's bounty. The earls of Argyle, Rothes, and 
Glencairn, the lords Boyde and Ochiltry, Kirkaldy 
of Grange, Pittarow, were inftigated by like mo- 
tives; and as thefe were the perfons who had mod 
zealoufly promoted the reformation, they were dif- 
gifted to find that the queen's favour was entirely 
engrofled by a new cabal, the earls of Bothwel, 
Athole, Sutlierland,. and Huntley ; men who were 
efteemed either lukewarm in religious controverfy, 
or inclined to the catholic party. The fame ground 
of difcontent, which, in other courts, is the fource 
of intrigue, faction, and oppofition, commonly pro- 
duced in Scotland, either projects of alTaffination, or 
of rebellion ; and befides mutual accufations of the 
former kind, which it is difficult to clear up ^, the 
malcontent lords, as foon as they faw the queen's 
marriage entirely refolved on, entered into a confe- 
deracy for taking arms againft their fovereign. 
They met at Stirling ; pretended an anxious concern 
for the fecurity of religion ; framed engagements for 
mutual defence ; and made applications to Eliza- 
beth for affiflance and protection '. That princefs, 
after publiiliing the expreffions of her difpleafure 
againft the marriage, had fecretly ordered her am^ 
baffadors, Randolf and Throgmorton, to give in her 
name fome promifes of fupport to the malcontents ; 
and had even fent them a fupply of ten thoufand 
pounds, to enable them to begin an infurreftion "". 

Mary was no fooner infprrned of the meeting at 
Stirhng, and the movements of the lords, than Ihe 

k See note [G] at the end of the volume. 1 Keith, p. t^i, 

af)4. 300. 301. "• Knox, p. 3S0. Keith, Append, p. 164, 

AndedoJi, vol, iii. p, 154., 

. fummoned 



t) 



ELIZABETH. 91 

fummoned them to appear in court, in order to an- chap. 
fwer for their condud: ; and having levied fome .^^^^ ^ 
forces to execute the laws, fhe obliged the rebels to 1565. 
leave the low countries, and take fhelter in Ar- 
gylefhire. That flic might more effedlually cut off 
their refources, (he proceeded with the king to Glaf- 
gow, and forced them from their retreat I'hey 
appeared at Paifley in the neighbourhood with about 
a thoufand horfe ; and palling the queen's army, 
proceeded to Hamilton, thence to Edinburgh, 
which they entered without refiftance. They ex- 
pefted great reinforcements in this place, from the 
efforts of Knox and the feditious preachers ; and 
they beat their drums, defiring all men to enlift, 
and to receive wages for the defence of God's 

lory ". But the nation was in no difpofition for 
rebellion : Mary was efleemed and beloved : Her 
marriage was not generally difagreeable to the 
people : And the interefted vieu's of the malcontent 
lords were fo well known, that their pretence of zeal 
for religion had little influence even on the ignorant 
populace °. The king and queen advanced to Edin- 
burgh at the head of their army : The rebels were 
obliged to retire into the fouth ; and being purfued 
by a force which now amounted to eighteen thou- 
fand men % they found themfelves under a neceffity 
of abandoning their country, and of taking fhelter 
in England. 

Elizabeth, when fhe found the event fo much 
to difappoint her expectations, thought proper to 
difavow all connexions with the Scottifh malcon- 
tents, and to declare every where, that fhe had 

never given them any encouragement, nor any pro- 
mife of countenance or affiflance. She even carried 
farther her diffimulation and hypocrify. Murray 

had come to London, with the abbot of Kilwinning, 

agent for Chatelrault; and fhe feduced them, by 

j» Knox, p. 38^. • Ibid, p. 380. 385. p Ibid. p. ^88. 

fecret 



92 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

c H A p. fecret afiurances of proteftlon, to declare, before the 
^^^^.^^..^ ambaffadors of France and Spain, that (he had no- 
1565. wife contributed to their infurredion. No fooner 
had fhe extorted this confefTion from them, than fhe 
chafed them from her prefence, called them unwor- 
thy traitors, declared that their deteltable rebellion 
was of bad example to all princes ; and affured 
them, that as fhe had hitherto given them no en- 
couragement, fo Ihould they never thenceforth 
receive from her any alliftance or protection ■*. 
Throgmortbn alone, whofe honour was equal to 
his abilities, could not be prevailed on to conceal the 
part which he had afted in the enterprife of the 
Scottifii rebels ; and being well apprifed of the ufual 
character and condudt of EHzabeth, he had had the 
precaution to obtain an order ot council to authorife 
the engagements which he had been obliged to make 
with them \ 

The banifhed lords, finding themfelves fo harflily 
treated by Elizabeth, had recourfe to the clemency 
of their own fovereign ; and after fome folicitation 
and fome profeihons of fnicere repentance, the duke 
of Chatelrault obtained his pardon, on condition 
that he iliould retire into France. Mary was more 
implacable againft the ungrateful earl of Murray 
and the other confederates, on whom fhe threw the 
chief blame of the enterprife ; but as flie was con- 
tinually plied with applications from their friends, 
and as fome of her mofb judicious partifans in Eng- 
land thought that nothing would more promote her 
interefts in that kingdom, than the gentle treatment 
of men fo celebrated for their zeal againft the catholic 
religion ; flie agreed to give way to her natural tem- 
per, which inclined not to feverity, and fhe feemed 
determined to reftore them to favour '. In this in- 
terval, Rambouillet arrived as ambaffador from 

1 Melvil, p. 57. Knox, p. 388. Keith, p. 319. Crawford, p. 62, 63. 
r Melvilj p. 60. * Ibid. p. jy, 60, Oi, 6z, 6j. Keith, p. 3*2. 

France, 



E L I^ A B E T H. 93 

France, and brought her advice from her uncle, tlic ^^[^ ^ ?• 
cardinal of Lorraine, to whofe opinion fhe always v^^,i,-,,^<-^ 
paid an extreme deference, by no means to pardon 1565. 
thefe proteftant leaders, who had been engaged in a 
rebellion againfl her '. 

The two religion,^;, in France, as well as in other 
parts of Europe, were rather irritated than tired 
with their afts of mutual violence ; and the peace 
granted to the hugonots, as had been forefeen by 
Coligny, was intended only to lull them afleep, and 
prepare the way for their final and. abfolute de- 
llruftion. The queen-regent made a pretence of 
travelling through the kingdom, in order to vifit the 
provinces, and correct all the abufes arifmg from the 
late civil war ; and after having held fome confer- 
ences on the frontiers with the duke of Lorraine and 
the duke of Savoy, flie came to Bayonne, where fhe 
w^s met by her daughter, the queen of SpVtin, and 
the duke of Alva. Nothing appeared in the con- 
grefs of thefe two fplendid courts, but gaiety, fefti- 
vity, love, and joy ; but amidfl thefe fmiling appear- 
ances were fecretly fabricated fchemes the mofl 
bloody, and the moft deftruftive to the repofe of man- 
kind, that had ever been thought of in any age or na- 
tion. No lefs than a total and univerfal extermina- 
tion of the proteftants by fire and fword was concerted 
by Philip and Catherine of Medicis ; and Alva, agree- 
ably to his fierce and fanguinary difpofition, advifed 
the queen-regent to commence the execution of this 
projeft, by the immediate maiTacre of all the leaders 
of the hugonots ". But that princefs, though equally 
hardened againfl every humane fentiment, would not 
forego this opportunity of diiplaying her wit and re- 
fined poHtics ; and fhe purpofed, rather by treachery 
and difhmulation, which fhe called addrefs, to I^ad 
the proteftants into the fnare, and never to draw the 
fword till they were totally difabled from refiftance. 

' Keith, p. 315. Melvil, p, 63. " Davila, lib. iii. 

The 



94 

CHAP 
XXXIX. 

Confe- 
deracy 
again ft 
the pro- 
teftants. 



1565- 



HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

The cardinal of Lorraine, whofe chara£ler bore a 
greater affinity to that of Alva, was a chief author* 
of this barbarous aflbciation againft the reformers ; 
and having connected hopes of fuccefs with the ag- 
grandifement of his niece, the queen of Scots, he 
took care, that her meafures fhould correfpond to 
thofe violent counfels which were embraced by the 
other catholic princes. In confequence of this fcheme, 
he turned her from the road of clemency, which fhe 
intended to have followed ; and made her refolve on 
the total ruin of the banifhed lords "'. A parliament 
was furamoned at Edinburgh for attainting them ; 
and as their guilt was palpable and avowed, no doubt 
was entertained but fentence would be pronounced 
againft them. It was by a fudden and violent in- 
cident, which, in the iflue, brought on the ruih of 
Mary herfelf, that they were faved from the rigour 
of the law. 

The marriage of the queen of Scots with lord 
Darnley was fo natural, and fo inviting in all its cir- 
cumftances, that it had been precipitately agreed to 
by that princefs and her council ; and while Ihe was 
allured by his youth and beauty, and exterior ac- 
compliftiments, fhe had at firft overlooked the qua- 
lities of his mind, which nowife correfponded to the 
excellence of his outward figure. Violent, yet va- 
riable in his refolutions ; infolent, yet credulous and 
eafily governed by flatterers ; he was deftitute of all 
gratitude, becaufe he thought no favours equal to 
his merit ; and being addicted to low pleafures, he 
^•as equally incapable of all true fentiments of love 
and tendernefs ". The queen of Scots, in the firft 
effufions of her fondnefs, had taken a pleafure in ex- 
alting him beyond meafure : She had granted him 
the title of king ; fhe had joined his name with her 
own in all public adsj fhe intended to have pro- 



w Melvil, p, 63. Keith's Append, p. 176, 
315. Append, p. i6j. 



X Keith, p. 387. 

cured 




ELIZABETH. 

cured him from the parliament a matrimonial crown: 
But having leifure afterwards to remark his weaknefs 
and vices, fhe began to fee the danger of her profufe 1566. 
liberality, and was refolved thenceforth to proceed 
with more referve in the trufl which flie fhould con* 
fer upon him. His refentment againft this prudent 
condud ferved but the more to increafe her difgult ; 
and the young prince, enraged at her imagined 
negleds, pointed his vengeance againil every one 
whom he deemed the caufe of this change in her 
nieafures and behaviour. 

There was in the court, one David Rizzio, who Murder of 
had of late obtained a very extraordinary degree of J^'^zw. 
confidence and favour with the queen of Scots. He 
was a Piedmontefe, of mean birth, fon of a teacher 
of mufic, himfelf a mufician ; and finding it difficult 
to fubfifl by his art in his own country, he had fol- 
lowed into Scotland an ambafi'ador, whom the duke 
of Savoy fent thither to pay his compliments to 
Mary, fome time after her firft arrival. He pofTelTed 
a good ear and a tolerable voice ; and as that prin- 
cefs found him ufeful to complete her band of mufic, 
fhe retained him in her fervice after the departure ojF 
his mafter. Her fecretary for French difpatches hav- 
ing, fome time after, incurred her difpleafure, fhe ' 
promoted Rizzio to that office, which gave him fre- 
quent opportunities of approaching her perfon and 
infmuating himfelf into her favour. He was Ihrewd 
and fenfible, as well as afpiring, much beyond his 
rank and education ; and he made fo good ufe of the 
accefs which fortune had procured him, that he was 
foon regarded as the chief confident, and even mini- 
fler of the queen. He was confulted on all occafions ; 
no favours could be obtained but by his interceflion ; 
all fuitors were obliged to gain him by prefents and 
flattery ; and the man, infolent from his new exalta- 
tion, as well as rapacious in his acquilitions, foon 
drew on himfelf the hatred of the nobility and of the 

6 whole 



95 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

^^^^^* whole kingdom ^. He had at firfl employed his 
v,_,..^,^^^,,^ credit to promote Darnley's marriage ; and a firm 
1566. friendfliip feemed to be eflablifhed between them : 
But on the fubfequent change of the queen's fenti- 
ments, it was eafy for Henry's friends to perfuade 
him that Rizzio was the real author of her indif- 
ference, and even to roufe in his mind jealoufies 
of a more dangerous nature. The favourite was of a 
difagreeable figure, but was not pad his youth ^ ; and 
though the opinion of his criminal correfpondence 
with Mary might feem of itfeif unreafonable, if not 
abfurd, a fufpicious hufband could find no other 
means of accounting for that lavifh and imprudent 
kindnefs with which fiie honoured him. The rigid 
auffcerity of the ecclefiailics, who could admit of no 
freedoms, contributed to fpread this opinion among 
the people ; and as Rizzio was univerfally believed 
to be a penfionary of the pope's, and to be deeply 
engaged in all fchemes againfl the proteflants, any 
ftory, to his and Mary's difadvantage, received an 
eafy credit among the zealots of that commu- 
nion. 

Rizzio, who had conne5:ed his interefls with the 
Roman cathoHcs, was the declared enemy of the 
banifhed lords ; and by promoting the violent pro- 
fecution againft them, he ha(^ expofed himfelf to the 
animofity of their numerous friends and retainers. A 
fcheme was alfo thought to be formed for revoking 
fome exorbitant grants made during the ^queen's mi- 
nority ; and even the nobility who had feized the 
ecclefiaftical benefices, began to thinkth emfelves lefs 
fecure in the poffeliion of them *. The earl of Mor- 
ton, chancellor, was affeded by"all thefe confidera- 
tions, and ftill more by a rumour fpread abroad, that 
Mary intended to appoint Rizzio chancellor in his 

y Keith, p. 282. 302. Crawford's Memcu-s, p. 5. Spotfwood, 
p. -197. 2 See note (H) at the end of the volume. 

* Keith, p. 326. Melvil, p. 64.. 

place, 



ELIZABETH: 97 

jpiace, and to beftow that dignity on a mean and chap. 
upftart foreigner, ignorant of the laws and language ^^^1^ 
of the country *'. So indifcreet had this princefs been ,56$, " 
in her kindnefs to Rizzio, that even that ftrange re- 
port met with credit, and proved a great means of 
accelerating the ruin of the favourite. Morton, in- 
fmuating himfelf into Henry*s confidence, employed 
all his art to inflame the difcontent and jealoufy of 
that prince ; and he perfuaded him that the only 
means of freeing himfelf from the indignities under 
which he laboured, was to bring the bafe ftranger to 
the fate which he had fo well merited, and which 
was fo paflionately defired by the whole nation. 
George Douglas, natural brother to the countefs of 
Lenox, concurred in the fame advice ; and the lords 
Ruthven and Lindefey, being confulted, offered their 
affiflance in the enterprife ; nor was even the earl of 
Lenox, the king's father, averfe to the defrgn ^ But 
as thefe confpirators were well acquainted with Hen- 
ry's levity, they engaged him to fign a paper, in. 
which he avowed the undertaking, as tending to the 
glory of God and advancement of religion, and pro- 
mifed to protecl them againft every confequence 
which might enfue upon the aifaffination of Rizzio''. 
All thefe meafures being concerted, a meffenger was 
difpatched to the baniflied lords, who were hovering 
near the borders ; and they were invited by the king 
to return to their native country. 

This defign, fo atrocious in itfelf, was rendered 9^h March, 
ftill more lb by the clrcumltances which attended its 
execution. Mary, who was in the fixth month of 
her pregnancy, was fupping in private, and had at 
table the countefs of Argyle, her natural filler, with 
Rizzio and others of her fervants. The king entered 
the room by a private paffage, and ftood at the back * 

^ Ruchanan, Hh. xvii. c. 60. Crawford, p. 6. Spotfwood, p. 1940 
Knox, p. 393. jL-bb, vol. i. p. 4.56. <= Crawford, p. 7. 

<* Goodail, vol. i. p. 266. Crawiord, p. 7. 

Vol. V. H . of 



9S HISTORY OF ENGLANf^. 

CHAP, of Mary's chair : Lord Ruthven, George Douglafy. 

/^^^^^ and other confpirators, being all armed, rufhed in 
1566. ^fter him ; and the queen of Scots, terrified with the 
appearance, demanded of them the reafon of this 
rude intrufion. They told her, that they intended 
no violence againfl: her perfon ; but meant only to 
bring that villain, pointing at Rizzio, to his deferved 
punifhment. Rizzio, aware of the danger, ran be- 
hind his miftrefs, and feizing her by the waift, called 
aloud to her for proteftion ; while fhe interpofed in 
his behalf, with cries, and menaces, and entreaties. 
The impatient aflaflins, regardlefs of her efforts, 
rufhed upon their prey, and by overturning every 
thing which flood in their way, increafed the horror 
and confuficn of the fcene. Douglas, feizing Hen- 
ry's dagger, fluck it in the body of Rizzio, who, 
fcreaming v/ith fear and agony, was torn from Mary 
by the other confpirators, and puHied into the anti- 
chamber, where he was difpatched with fifty-fix 
wounds ^» The unhappy princefs, informed of his 
fate, immediately dried her tears, and faid. She- 
would weep no more, fhe would now think of re- 
venge. The infult, indeed, upon her perfon ; the 
flain attempted to be- fixed on her honour ; the 
danger to which her life was expofed, on account 
of her pregnancy ; were injuries fo atrocious and fo- 
complicated, that they fcarcely left room for pardon,, 
even from the greateft lenity and mere}'. 

The ail'aflins, apprehenfive of Mary's refentment, 
detained her prifoner in the palace ; and the king dif- 
miffed all who feemed willing to attempt her refcue, 
by telling them that nothing was done without his 
orders, and that he would be careful of the queen's 
fafety. Murray and the banifhed lords appeared 
two days after j and Mary, whofe anger was now en- 
groffed by injuries more recent and violent, was will- 

* Melvil, p. 64, Keitli, p. 330, 331. Ciawfoid, p. 9. 

10 ingly 



ELIZABETH; <)9 

mgly reconciled to them ; and fhe even received her CHAP. 
brother with tendernefs and affeciion. They ob- ^J^^^^i^ 
tained an acquittal from parliament, and were re- i5<56» ' 
inftated in their honours and fortunes. The accom- 
plices alfo in Rizzio's murder applied to her for a 
pardon ; but flie artfully delayed compliance, and 
perfuaded them, that fo long as (lie was detained in 
cuftody, and was furrounded by guards, any deed, 
which (he ihould fign, v/ould have no validity. 
Meanwhile, (he had gained the confidence of her 
hufband, by her perfuafion and careffes ; and no 
iboner were the guards withdrawn, than fhe en- 
gaged him to.efcape v/ith her in the night-time, and 
take fheker in Dunbar. Many of her fubjefts here 
oifered her their fervices : And Mary having col- 
leded an army, which the confpirators had no power 
to refiR, advanced to Edinburgh, and obliged them 
to fly into England, where they lived in great poverty 
and diftrefs. They made applications however to the 
earl of Bothwel, a new favourite of Mary's ; and 
that nobiemanj defirous of flrengthening his party 
by the accefTion of their intereft, was able to pacify 
her refentment ; and he foon after procured them 
liberty to return into their own country ^ 

The vengeance of the queen of Scots was im- 
placable againfl: her hufband alone, whofe perfon was 
before difagreeable to her, and who, by his violation 
of every tie of gratitude and duty, had now drawn 
on him her highefl refentment. She engaged him 
to difown all connexions with the alTaflins, to deny 
any concurrence in their crime, even to publifh a 
proclamation containing a falfehood fo notorious to 
the whole world ^ ; and having thus made him ex- 
pofe himfelf to univerfal contempt, and rendered it 
impracticable for him ever to acquire the confidence 
of any party, fhe threw him off with difdain and 

f Melvil, p. 75, 76. Keith, p. 334. Knox, p. 598. 
8 Goodall, Tol. i. p. z8o. Keith Append, p. 167. 

H 2 indignation* . 



200 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, indignation ''. As if fhe had been making an efcape 
3^XIX.^ from him, fhe fuddenly withdrew to Alloa, a feat of 
,566. the earl of Marre's ; and when Henry followed her 
thither, fhe fuddenly returned to Edinburgh ; and 
gave him every where the flrongeft proofs of dif- 
pleafure, and even of antipathy. She encouraged 
her courtiers in their negleft of him ; and flie was 
pleafed that his mean equipage and fmall train of 
attendants fhould draw on him the contempt of the 
very populace. He was permitted, however, to have 
apartments in the caftle of Edinburgh, which Mary 
19th June, had chofen for the place of her delivery. She there 
brought forth a fon ; and as this was very important 
news to England as well as to Scotland, fhe immedi- 
ately difpatched fir James Melvil to carry intelligence 
of the happy event to Elizabeth. Melvil tells us, 
that this princefs, the evening of his arrival in Lon- 
don, had given a ball to her court at Greenwich, 
and was difplaying all that fpirit and alacrity, which 
ufually attended her on thefe occafions : But when 
news arrived of the prince of Scotland's birth, all 
her joy was damped : She funk into melancholy ; 
fhe reclined her head upon her arm ; and complained 
to fome of her attendants, that the queen of Scots 
was mother of a fair fon, while fhe herfelf was but a 
barren flock. Next day, however, at the reception 
of the ambaflador, fhe refumed her former diflimu- 
lation, put on a joyful countenance, gave Melvil 
thanks for the hafte he had made in conveying to 
her the agreeable intelligence, and expreffed the ut- 
mofl cordiality and friendfhip to her fifler '. Some 
time after, flie difpatched the earl of Bedford, with 
her kinfman George Gary, fon of lord Hunfdon, 
in order to officiate at the baptifm of the , young 
prince ; and fhe fent by them fome magnificent pre- 
sents to the queen of Scots, 

^ Melvil, p. 66, 67* * Ibid. p. 69, 70. 

The 



ELIZABETH. loi 

The birth of a fon gave additional zeal to Mary*s CHAP. 
partifans in England ^ j and even men of the moft xxxix. 
oppofite parties began to cry aloud for fome fettle- ,^55^ 
ment of the fucceffion. Thefe humours broke out 
with great vehemence in a new feffion of parliament 
held after fix prorogations. The houfe of peers, 30th Sept. 
which had hitherto forborne to touch on this deli- j^ P"' 
cate point, here took the lead ; and the houfe of 
commons foon after imitated the zeal of the lords. 
Molineux opened the matter in the lower houfe, and 
propofed that the queftion of the fucceffion and that 
of fupply fhould go hand in hand ; as if it were in- 
tended to conftrain the queen to a compliance with 
the requefl of her parliament '. The courtiers en- 
deavoured to elude the debate : Sir Ralph Sadler 
told the houfe, that he had heard the queen pofi- 
tively affirm, that, for the good of her people, Ihe 
was determined to marry. Secretary Cecil and fir 
Francis Knollys gave their teftimony to the fame 
purpofe ; as did alfo fir Ambrofe Cave, chancellor 
of the duchy, and fir Edward Rogers, comptroller of 
the houfehold ". Elizabeth's ambitious and mafcu- 
iine character was fo well known that few members 
gave any credit to t]iis intelligence ; and it was con- 
fidered merely as an artifice, by which fhe endea- 
voured to retract that pofitive declaration, which fhe 
had made in the beginning of her reign, that fhe meant 
to live and die a virgin. The minillers, therefore, 
gained nothing farther by this piece of policy, than 
only to engage the houfe, for the fake of decency, 
to join the queftion of the queen's marriage with that 
of a fettlement of the crown ; and the commons were 
proceeding with great earneftnefs in the debate, and 
had even appointed a committee to confer with the 
lords, when exprefs orders were brought them from 
Elizabeth not to proceed farther in the matter, 

^ Camden, p. 357, i D'Ewes, p. 129. 

*n Ibid. p. i*!-, 

H 3 Cecil 



jQ^ HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, Cecil told them, that fhe pledged to the houfe the 
XXXIX. ^vord of a queen for her fmcerity in her intentions 
J 566. to marry ; that the appointment of a fucceifor would 
be attended with great danger to her perfon ; that 
Ihe herfclf had had experience, during the reign of 
her filler, how much court was ufually paid to the 
next heir, and what dangerous facrifices men were 
commonly difpofed to make of their prefent duty to 
their future profpects ; and that ihe was therefore 
determined to delay, till a more proper opportunity, 
the decifion of that important quedion ". The houfe 
was not fatisfied with thefe reafons, and ftill lefs 
with the command, prohibiting them all debate on 
the fubjecl. Paul VvTentworth, a fpirited member, 
•went fo far as to queflion whether fuch a prohibition 
were not an infringement of the liberties and privi- 
leges of the houfe ^ Some even ventured to violate 
that profound refpect which had hitherto been pre- 
ferved to tjie queen ; and they affirmed that ihe was 
' bound in duty, not only to provide for the happinefs 

of her fubjefts during her own life, but alfo to pay 
regard to their future fecuriry, by fixing a fucceffor ; 
that, by an oppofite conduct, Chq fliewed herfelf the 
ftep-mother, not the natural parent, of her people, 
and would feem deHrous, that England fliould no 
longer fubfift than Ihe fliould enjoy the glory and 
fatisfaftion of governing it ; that none but timorous 
princes, or tyrants, or faint-hearted women, ever 
llood in fear of their fuccelfors ; and that the affec- 
tions of the people were a firm and impregnable 
rampart to every fovereign, who, laying afide all 
artifice or bye-ends, had courage and magnanimity 
to put his v/hole trufl in that honourable and fure 
defence ^. The queen, hearing of thefe debates, fent 
for the fpeaker, and after reiterating her former pro- 
hibition, fhe bade him inform the houfe, that if any 



n P'Ewes, p. 117, ia2, • Ibid, p, laS. 

f Cainden, p. 4.00. 



fnembey- 



ELIZABETH. xo^ 

member remained ftill unfatlsfied, he might appear CHAP. 
before the privy council, and there give his reafons *^. ^J^^l^^i^ 
As the members fliewed a difpofition, notwithftand- ^^cc 
ing thefe peremptory orders, ftill to proceed upon 
the queflion, Elizabeth thought proper, by a meflage, 
to revoke them, and to allov/ the houfe hberty of de- 
'bate \ They were fo molhfied by this gracious con- 
defcenfion, that they thenceforth conduced the mat- 
ter with more calmnefs and temper ; and they even 
voted her a fupply, to be levied at three payments, 
of a fubfidy and a fifteenth, without annexing any 
condition to it. The queen foon after diffolved the 2^' P^" 
parliament, and teld them with fome (harpnefs in *^^^* 
the conclufion, that their proceedings had contained 
much dillimuiation and artifice ; that, under the 
plaufible pretences of m.arriage and fucceflion, many 
■of them covered very malevolent intentions towards 
her ; but that, however, (lie reaped this advantage 
from the attempts of thefe men, that fhe could now 
diitinguifli her friends from her enemies. " But do 
*' you think," added ihe, ^^ that I am unmindful 
^' of your future fecurity, or will be negligent in 
*' fettling the fuceeilion ? That is the chief objecl of 
*' my concern ; as I know myfelf to be liable to mor- 
*' tality. Or do you apprehend that I meant to en- 
*' croach on yaur liberties ? No : it was never my 
*' meaning ; I only hitended to flop you before you 
*' approached the precipice. All things have their 
" time ; and though you may be blelfed with a fo- 
*' vereign more wife or more learned than I, yet I 
*• aifure you, that no one will ever rule over you, 
" who fhall be more careful of your fafety. And 
^' therefore, henceforward, whether I live to fee the 
*' like afl'embly or no, or whoever holds the reins of 
*' government, let me warn you to beware of pro- 
*^ voking your fovercign's patience, fo far as you 

9 D'Ewes, p. laS. » Ibid, p, 130, 

H 4 " have 



je4 • HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP. *« have done mine. But I ftiall now conclude, thatj 
XXXIX. <c notwithftanding the difgufts I have received (for 



J ,g^. " I mean not to part with you in anger), the greater 
*' part of you may aflure themfeives that they go 
*' home in their prince's good graces %'* 

Elizabeth carried farther her dignity on this oc- 
cafion. She had received tlie fubfidy without any 
condition ; but as it was beheved that the commons 
had given her that gratuity with a view of engaging 
her to yield to their reqaefls, fhe thought proper, on 
her refufal, voluntarily to remit the third payment 5 
and {he faid, that money in her fubjects purfes was 
as good to her as in her own exchequer \ 

But though the queen was able to elude, for the 
prefent, the applications of parliament, the friends of 
the queen of Scots multiplied every day in England ; 
and befides the catholics, many of whom kept a 
treafonable correfpondence with her, and were ready 
to rife at her command ", the court itfeif of Elizabeth 
ivas full of her avowed partifans. The duke of Nor- 
folk, the earls of Leicefter, Pembroke, Bedford, 
Northumberland, fir Nicholas Throgmorton, and 
moft of the coofiderable men in E^igland, except 
Cecil, feemed convinced of the neceffity of declaring 
her the fucceiTor. None but the more zealous pro- 
teftants adhered either to the countefs of Hertford, 
or to her aunt, Eleanor countefs of Cumberland ; 
•and as the marriage of the former feemed hable to 
Ibme objeflions, and h;;d been declared invalid, men 
were alarmed, even on that fide, with the profped of 
new difputes concerning the fucceflion. Mary's beha- 
viour alfo, fo moderate towards the proteflants, and 
fo gracious tcjkvards all men, had procured her uni- 
verfal refpecf'; and the public was willing to afcribe 
•^ny imprudences, into which fhe had fallen, to her 



* D'Ewes, p. 116, 117, ' Camden, p. 4.00. 

a Haynes, p. ^6. 44S, '^ MeJvil, ;.. 53. 61. 74. 



youth 



ELIZABETH. 



lOJ 



youth and Inexperience. But all thefe flattering chap. 
profpefts were blafted by the fubfequent incidents ; -^"^^xiX- 
where her egregious indifcretions, fhall I fay, or ,5 
atrocious crimes, threw her from the height of her 
profperity, and involved her in infamy and in ruin. 

The earl of Bothwel was of a confiderable fa- Murder of 
inily and power in Scotland ; and though not dif- Damley. 
tinguiflied by any talents either of a civil or military 
nature, he had made a figure in that party, which 
oppofed the greatnefs of the earl of Murray, and 
the more rigid reformers. He was a man of pro- 
fligate manners ; had involved his opulent fortune ii> 
great 4ei)ts ; and even reduced himfelf to beggary 
by his profufe expences " ; and feemed to have no 
refource but in defperate councils and enterprifes. 
He had been accufed more than once of an attempt 
to aflallinate Murray ; and though the frequency of 
thefe accufations on all fides diminifh fomewhat the 
credit due to any particular imputation, they prove 
fufficiently the prevalence of that deteftable pradice 
in Scotland, and may in that view ferve to render 
fuch rumours the more credible. This man had of 
late acquired the favour and entire confidence of 
Mary ; and all her meafures were directed by his 
advice and authority. Reports <\^ere fpread of more 
particular intimacies between them ; and thefe re- 
ports gained ground from the continuance or rather 
increafe of her hatred tov»'ards her hufband ^'. That 
young prince was reduced to fuch a ftate of defpe- 
ration, by the neglefts which he underwent from 
his queen and the courtiers, that he had once re- 
folved to fly fecretly into France or Spain, and had 
even provided a veflel for that purpofe ^. Some of 
the moil confiderable nobility, on the other hand, 
obferving her rooted averfion to him, had propofed 
feme expedients for a divorce; and though Mary 

X Keith, p. 240. J Melvil, p. 66. 77. 

» Keith, p. 345 — 348, 

13 is 



io6 HISTORY OF ENGLA^7D. 

CHAP, is faid to have fpoken honourably on the occnfion, 
XXXIX. 2_nc\ to have embraced the propofal no farther than 
,^,^ it fliould be foun4 confiftent vvith her own ho- 
nour and her Ion's legitimacy % men v/ere inclined 
to believe that the difficulty of finding proper means 
for eifefting that purpofe, v/as the real caufe of 
laying afide ail farther thoughts of it. So far were 
the fufpicions agalnft her carried, that when Henry, 
difcouraged with the continual proofs of her hatred, 
left the court and retired to Glafgow, an illnefs of 
an extraordinary nature, M'ith which he was feized 
immediately on his arrival in that place, was uni- 
verfally afcribed by her enemies to a dofe of poifon, 
which, it was pretended, fhe had adminillered to 
him. 

While affairs were'in this fituation, all thofe who 
wiflied well to her characler, or to public tranquil- 
lity, were extremely pleafed, and fomevv'hat furprifed, 
to hear, that a friendfhip was again conciliated be- 
tween them, that ihe had taken a journey to Glafgow 
on purpofe to vifit him during, his ficknefs, that flie 
behaved towards him with great tendernefs, that 
fhe had brought him along with her, and that fhe 
appeared thenceforth determined to live with him on 
a footing more fuitable to the connexions between 
them. Pienry, naturally uxorious, and not dif. 
truiling this fudden reconciliation, put himfelf im- 
plicitly into her hands, and attended her to Edin- 
burgh. She lived in the palace of Holy-rood -houfe ; 
bur as . the lltuation of the place was low, and the 
concouri'e of people about the court was neceffarily 
attended with nolle, which might difturb him in his 
prefent infirm Itate of health, thefe reafons were 
ylfigned for fitting up an apartment for him in a fo- 
litary houfe, at fome difiance, called the Kirk of 
Field. Mary here gave him marks of kindnefs and 
attachment ; fhe converfed cordially with him ; and 

» Camden, p. 404.. Goodall's Qneen Mary, vol, ii. p. 317. 

fhe 



ELIZABETH. J07 



lay fome nights in a room below his ; but on c ii A P. 
ninth of February, flie told him, that flie would ^-^'^"^^^ 



fhe 

the nint 

pafs that night in the palace, becaufe the marriage ^1567. 
of i;ne of her fervants was there to be celebrated in 
her prefence. Aijout two o'clock in the morning 
th:; nbole town was much alarmed at hearing a 
great noife ; and was ftill more aflonifiied, when it 
was diicLvered that the noife came from the king's 
houfe, which was blown up by gun-powder ; that 
his dead body was found at fome diftance in a neigh- 
bouring field ; and that no marks either of fire, con- 
tufion, cr violence appeared upon it^ 

No doubt could be entertained but Elenry was 
murdered ; and general conjedicre foon pointed to- 
wards the earl of Bothwel as the author of the 
crime ". But as his favour v/ith Mary was vifible, 
and his power great, no one ventured to declare 
openly his fentiments ; and all men remained in 
filence and mute aftonilhment. Voices, however, 
were heard in the ftreets, during the darknefs of the 
night, proclaiming Bothwel, and even Mary herfelf, 
to be murderers of the king; bills werefecretl , LiiHxed 
on the walls to the fame purpofe ; offers were made 
that, upon giving proper fecurities, his guilt fhould 
be openly proved. But after one proclamation from 
the court, offering a reward and indemnity to any 
one that would difcover the author of that villany, 
greater vigilance was employed in fearching out the 
fpreaders of the libels and reports againii: Bothwel 
and the queen, than in tracing the contrivers of the 
jking's aflaffination, or detecting the regicides ^. 

^ It was imagined that Henry had been ftrangled before the honfe 
wns blown up. But this fuppofuion is contradietetl by the contcfiion 
of the criminals ; and there is no necefllty to admit it in cider to ac- 
count for the condition of his body. There are n.any inltances tiiat 
men's lives liave been faved who had been blown up in fliips. Had 
Henry fallen on water he had not probably been killed. 
_ c Melvil, p. 78. Cabala, p. 136. J Andeif..n's Coikc- 

tiors, vol. ii. p. 38, vol. iv. p. 167, i62, Spotrwood, p. zco. 
JCeiih, p. 374. 

The 



io8 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP. The earl of Lenox, who lived at a diftance from 
XXXIX. court, in poverty and contempt, was roufed by the 
,^6 report of his fon's murder, and wrote to the queen, 
imploring fpeedy juftice againft the alTaffins ; among 
whom he named the earl of Bothwel, fir James 
Balfour, and Gilbert Balfour his brother, David 
Chalmers, and four others of the queen's houfehold ; 
all of them perfons who had been mentioned in 
the bills affixed to the walls at Edinburgh % Mary 
took his demand of fpeedy juftice in a very literal 
fenfe ; and allowing only fifteen days for the ex- 
amination of this important affair, fhe fent a cita- 
tion to Lenox, requiring him to appear in court, 
and prove his charge againft Bothwel ^ This noble- 
man, meanwhile, and all the other perfons accufed 
by Lenox, enjoyed their full liberty ^ ; Bothwel 
himfelf was continually furrounded with armed 
men ^ ; took his place in council '■ ; lived during 
fome time in the houfe with Mary ^ ; and feemed to 
poffefs all his wonted confidence and familiarity 
with her. Even the caftle of Edinburgh, a place 
of great confequence in this critical time, was en- 
trufted to him, and under him, to his creature, fir 
James Balfour, who had himfelf been pubhcly 
charged as an accomplice in the king's murder ^ 
Lenox, who' had come as far as Stirling, with a 
view of appearing at the trial, was informed of all 
thefe circumitances ; and reflecting on the fmall 
train which attended him, he began to entertain 
very iu ft: apprehenfions from the power, infolence, 
and temerity of his enemy. He wrote to Mary, 
defiring that the day of trial might be prorogued ; 
and conjured her, by all the regard which Ihe bore 
to her own honour, to employ more leifure and de- 
liberation in determining a queftion of fuch extreme 

« Keith, p. 372. Anderfon, vol. ii. j). 3. <" Keith, p. 373. 

8 Ibid. p. 374., 37 5- ^ I^^'d- p. 405. * Andeiion, 

vol. i. p. 38. 40. 50. 52. ^ Ibid. voL ii. p. 274.. 

i Spoifwoodj p. 20 J. 

moment. 



ELIZABETH. 109 

moment ". No regard was paid to his application : chap. 
The jury was enclofed, of which the earl of Caith- ,^^ji^^i^ 
nefs was chancellor ; and though Lenox, forefeeing j^^r, 
this precipitation, had ordered Cunningham, one of 
his retinue, to appear in court, and proteft, in his 
name, againfl the acquittal of the criminal, the jury 
proceeded to a verdi6l ". The verdift was fuch as 
it behoved them to give, where neither accufer nor 
witnefs appeared; and Bothwel was abfolved from laiUApril, 
the king's murder. The jury, however, apprehen- 
five that their verdift would give great fcandal, and 
perhaps expofe them afterwards to fome danger, en- 
tered a proteft, in which they reprefented the ne- 
ceffity of their proceedings °. It is remarkable, that 
the indictment was laid againft Bothwel for com- 
mitting the crime on the ninth of February, not the 
tenth, the real day on which Henry was aflaffin- 
ated P. The interpretation generally put upon this 
error, too grofs, it was thought, to have proceeded 
from miftake, was, that the fecret council, by whom 
Mary was governed, not trufting entirely to preci- 
pitation, violence, and authority, had provided this 
plea, by which they enfured, at all adventures, a 
plaufible pietence for acquitting Bothwel. 

Two days after this extraordinary tranfaftion, a 
parliament was held ; and though the verdict in 
favour of Bothwel was attended with fuch circum- 
ftances as ftrongly confirmed, rather than dimi- 
nilhed, the general opinion of his guilt, he was the 
perfon chofen to carry the royal fceptre on the firft 
meeting of the national affembly'*. In this par- 
liament, a rigorous aft was made againft thofe 

m Keith, p. 375. AndtiTort, vol. i. p. 52. *> Keith, p, 576. 

Anderfon, vol. li. p. 106. Spotlwood, p. 201. ° Spotlwood, 

p. 201. Anderfon, vol, i. p. 113. P KJeith, p. 375 Anr 

deiTon, vol. ii. p. 93. SpotAvcod, p. jot. 1 Keith, p. 78. 

Crawford, p. i^. 

who 



no HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, who fet up defaPxiatory bills ; but no notice wa^ 
XXXIX. ^^iken of the king's murder \ The favour -which 
j,67. Mary openly bore to Bothwel, kept every one in 
awe ; and the effefts of this terror appeared more 
plainly in another tranfatlion, which enfued imme- 
diately upon the diffolution of the parliament. A 
bond or aflbciation was framed ; in which the fub- 
fcribers, after relating the acquittal of Bothwel by 
a legal trial, and mentioning a farther offer, which 
he had made to prove his innocence by fmgle com- 
bat, oblige themfelves, in cafe any perfon fhould 
afterwards impute to him the king's murder, to de- 
fend him with their v/hole power againft fuch ca- 
lumniators. After this pron;ife, which implied no 
great aiTurance in Bothwel of his own innocence, 
the fubfcribers mentioned the neceflity of their 
queen's marriage, in order to fupport the govern- 
ment ; and they recommended Bothwel to her as 
i+thAprll. a hufband '. This paper was fubfcribed by all the 
confiderable nobility there prefent. In a country 
divided by violent factions, fuch a concurrence in 
favour of one nobleman, nowife diflinguiflied above 
the reft, except by his flagitious condu6t, could 
never have been obtained, had not every one been 
certain, at lealt firmly perfuaded, that Mary was 
fully determined on this meafure \ Nor would fuch 
a motive have fufficed to influence men, commonly 
fo ftubborn and intracrtable, had they not been taken 
by furprife, been ignorant of each other's fenti- 
ments, and overawed by the prefent power of the 
court, and by the apprehenfions of farther violence, 
from perfo IS fo little governed by any principles of 
honour and humanity. Even with all thefe cir- 
cumftances, the fubfcription to this paper mayjuftly 
be regarded as a reproach to the nation. 



«• Keith, p. -;So. « Ibid. p. 381. 

^ Sec note [I] at the end of the volume. 



The 



ELIZABETH. 1 1 1 

TiiE fubfcquent mcafures of Bothwel were eqULiiIy c n A P. 
precipitate and audacious. Mary having gone to ^^^^.J^^l^ 
^)tirling to pay a vifit to her fon, he aiFembled ,^^^^ 
a body of eiuht hundred horfe, on pretence of pur- 
fuing fome robbers on the borders, and having 
waylaid her on her return, he feized her perfon near 24.thAfrii, 
Edinburgh, and carried her to Dunbar, with an 
avowed defign of forcing her to yield to his pur- 
pofe. Sir James Melvil, one of her retinue, v.^as 
carried along with her, and fays not, that he faw 
any figns of relu<^ance or conilraint : He was even 
informed, as he tells us, by Bothweli's officers, that 
the whole tranfaclion was managed in concert with 
her ". A woman, indeed, of that fpirit and refo- 
lution, which is acknowledged to belong to Mary, 
does not ufually, on thefe occafions, give fuch inarks 
of oppofition to ra?/ violence, as can appear any- 
wife doubtful or ambiguous. Some of the nobility, 
however, in order to put matters to farther trial, 
fent her a private melfage ; in which they told her, 
that if, in reality, fhe lay under force, they would 
ufe all their efforts to refcue her. Her anfwer was, 
that fhe had indeed been carried to Dunbar by 
violence, but ever fince her arrival had been fo Avell 
treated, that (he willingly remained with Bothwell \ 
No one gave himfelf thenceforth any concern to re- 
lieve her from a captivity, which was believed to 
proceed entirely from her own approbation and con- 
nivance. 

Tpiis unufual condu^l was at firft afcribed to 
Mary's fenfe of the infamy attending her purpofed 
marriage ; and her deiire of finding fome colour to 
glofs over the irregularity of her conduct. But a 
pardon, given to Bothwel a few days after, made 
the public carry their conjedures fomewhat farthjer. 
In this deed, Bothv/el received a pardon for the 
violence committed on the queen's perfon ; and for 
all other crimes : A claufe, by which the murder 

y Melvil, p. 80. "^ Spotfwood, p. 202. 

of 



112 HISTORY OF ENGLAND, 

CHAP, of the king was indireftly forgiven. The rape was 

yjLJ^ then conjectured to have been only a contrivance, 

1567 in order to afford a pretence for indirectly remitting 

a crime, of which it would have appeared fcandalous 

to make openly any mention ''. 

These events paifed with fuch rapidity, that men 
had no leifure to admire fufficiently one incident, 
when they were furprifed with a new one equally 
rare and uncommon. There Hill, however, re- 
mained one difficulty, Vv^hich it was not eafy to fore- 
fee how the queen and Bothwel, determined as they 
were to execute their fhameful purpofe, could find 
expedients to overcome. The man who had pro- 
cured the fubfcription of the nobility, recommend- 
ing him as a hufband to the queen, and who had 
afted this feemi;ng violence on her perfon, in order 
to force her confent, had been married two years 
before to another woman ; to a woman of merit, of 
a noble family, fifler to the earl of Huntley. But 
perfons blinded by pafTion, and infatuated with 
crimes, foon Ihake off all appearance of decency. 
A fuit was commenced for a divorce between Both- 
wel and his wife ; and this fuit was opened at the 
fame inftant in two different, or rather oppofite, 
courts ; in the court of the archbifhop of St. An- 
drevv's, which was popifh, and governed itfelf by 
the canon law ; and in the new confiilorial or com- 
miflariot court, which was proteflant, and was re- 
gulated by the principles of the reformed teachers. 
The plea, advanced in each court, was fo calculated 
as to fuit the principles which there prevailed : In 
the archbilhop's court, the pretence of confanguinity 
was employed, becaufe Bothwel v;as related to his 
wife in the fourth degree ; in the commiifariot court, 
the accufarion of adultery was made ufe of againft 
him. The parties too, who applied for the di- 
vorce, were difierent in the different courts : Bothwel 

* Anderfon, vol. Iv, part ii. p. 61. 

was 



ELIZABETH. 113 

was the perfon who fued In the former ; his wife in CHAP. 
the latter. And the fuit in both courts was opened, ^^jl^^i?^ 
pleaded, examined, and decided with the utmofl pre- ,^674 
cipitation ; and a fentence of divorce was pronounced 
in four days K 

The divorce being thus obtained, it was thought 
proper that Mary Ihould be conducted to Edin- 
burgh, and fhould there appear before the courts of 
judicature, and fhould acknov/ledge herfelf reftored 
to entire freedom. This was underftood to be con- 
^trived in a view of obviating all doubts with regard 
to the validity of her marriage. Orders were then 
given to publifh in the church the banns between 
the queen and the duke of Orkney ; for that was 
the title which he now bore ; and Craig, a minifler 
of Edinburgh, was applied to for that purpofe. 
This clergyman, not content with havin^ refufed 
compliance, publicly in his fermons condemned the 
marriage, and exhorted all who had accefs to the 
queen, to give her their advice againft fo fcandalous 
an alliance. Being called before the council, to 
anfwer for this liberty, he fhewed a courage which 
might cover all the nobles with fiiame, on account 
of their tamenefs and fervility. He faid, that, by 
the rules of the church, the earl of Bothwel, being 
convItSed of adultery, could not be permitted to 
marry ; that the divorce becvveeii him and his former 
Wife was plainly procured by coUufion, as appeared 
by the precipita^-'on of t!he fentence, and the fudden 
conclufion of his marriage with the queen ; and that 
all the fufpicions which prevailed, with regard to 
the king's murder, and the queen's concurrence in 
the former rape, would thence receive undoubted 
confirmation. He therefore exhorted Bothwel, who 
was prefent, no longer to perfevere in his prefent 
criminal enterprifes ; and turning his difcourfe to the 
other counfellorsjhe charged them.to employ all their 

y Andeifon, vo!. ii. p. *go. 

Vol. V. I influence 



114 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, influence with the queen, in order to divert her 
y^L.^^,.^ from a meaiure which would load her with eternal 
,567. infamy and diflionour. Not fatisfied even with this 
admonition, he took the firfl opportunity of inform- 
ing the public, from the pulpit, of the whole tranf- 
aclion, and exprelTed to them his fears, that, not- 
xvithftanding all remonitrances, their fovereign was 
Itill obllinately bent on her fatal purpofe. " For 
" himfelf," he laid, " he had already difcharged his, 
*' confcience, and yet again would take heaven and 
" earth to witnel's, that he abhorred and detefted 
" that marriage, as fcandalous and hateful in the 
" fight of mankind : But fmce the Great, as he 
*' perceived, either by their flattery or filence, gave 
*' countenance to the meafure, he befought the 
*' Faithful to pray fervently to the Almighty, that 
" a refolution, taken contrary to all law, reafon, 
" and good confcience, might, by the divine blelf- 
" ing, be turned to the comfort and benefit of the 
" church and kingdom." Thefe fpeeches offended 
the court extremely ; and Craig was anew fum- 
moned before the council, to anfwer for his temerity 
in thus pafling the bounds of his commiffion. But 
he told them, that the bounds of his commiffion 
were the word of God, good laws, and natural rea- 
fon ; and were the queen's marriage tried by any of 
thefe llandards, it would appear infamous and dif- 
honourable, and would be fo efleemed by the whole 
world. The council were fo overawed by this heroic 
behaviour in a private clergyman, that they difmifled 
him without farther cenfure or punifhment ''. 

But though this tranfaclion might have recalled 
Bothwel and the queen of Scots from their infatu- 
ation, and might have inftru6led them in the dif- 
pofitions of the people, as well as in tlieir own in- 
ability to oppofe them ; they were flill refolute to 
ruih forward to their own manifefl deftrudion, 

^ Spolfwood, p. 203. Andeifon, vol, ii, p. »8o, 

14 The 



I 



E L I Z A B B T H. 



IIS 



The marriage was folemnized by the bifhop of c h a p. 
Orkney, a proteftant, who was afterwards depofed ^^^J^ 
by the church for this fcandalous compliance. Few j^^^. 
of the nobility appeared at the ceremony: They 15*'' May. 
had mod of them, either from fhame or fear, re- ^ofs"„°/,.. 
tired to their own houfes. The French amballador, lies Both- 
Le Croc, an aged gentleman of honour and cha- '^^** 
rafter, could not be prevailed on, though a de- 
pendant of the houfe of Guife, to countenance the 
marriage by his prefence *. Elizabeth remonflrated, 
by friendly letters and meflages, againfl the mar- 
riage '' : The court of France made like oppofition ; 
but Mary, though on all other occafions fhe was 
extremely obfequious to the advice of her relations 
in that country, was here determined to pay no 
regard to their opinion. 

The news of thefe tranfadions, being carried to 
foreign countries, filled Europe with amazement, 
and threw infamy, not only on the principal aftors 
in them, but alfo on the whole nation, who feemed 
by their fubmiffion and fdence, and even by their 
declared approbation, to give their fanftion to thefe 
fcandalous praftices ". The Scots, who refided 
abroad, met with fuch reproaches, that they durfl 
nowhere appear in public ; and they earneflly ex- 
horted their countrymen at home to free them from 
the public odium, by bringing to condign punifh- 
ment the authors of fuch atrocious crimes. This 
intelligence, with a little more leifure for reflection, 
roufed men from their lethargy j and the rumours 
which, from the very beginning '^, had been fpread 
againft Mary, as if fhe had concurred in the king*s 
murder, feemed now, by the fubfequent tranfadions, 
to have received a flrong confirmation and autho- 
rity. It was every where faid, that even though 

a Spotfwood, p. 203. Melvil, p. 2%, l> Keith, p. 39s, 

Digges, p. 14. c Melvil, p. 82. Keith, p. 4.02. Anderfon, 

vol, i. p, izg, J34, d Crawford, p. ix. Keith, JPref. p. 9. 

1 2 no 



ii6 HISTORY OF ENGLAND 

c H A P. no particular and dlre6l proofs had as yet been pro- 
^^^^.^^^ nbunced of the queen's guilt, the whole tenour of 
,^67. her late conduct was fufficient, not only to beget 
fufpicion, but to produce entire conviction againft 
her : That her fudden refolution of being reconciled 
to her hufband, whom before fhe had long and juftly 
hated ; her bringing him to court, from which ftie 
had baniflied him by negledls and rigours ; her fit- 
ting up feparate apartments for him ; were all of 
them circumftances which, though trivial in them- 
felves, yet, being compared with the fubfequent events, 
bore a very unfavourable afpefl: for her : That the 
leafl which, after the king's murder, might have been 
expected in her fituation, was a more than ufual cau- 
tion in her meafures, and an extreme anxiety ta 
punilh the real alfaiTms, in order to free herfelf 
from ail reproach and fufpicion : That no woman, 
who had any regard to her character, would allow 
a man, publicly acciifed of her hufband's murder, 
lb much as to approach her prefence, far lefs give 
him a fhare in her councils, and endow him witfv 
favour and authority : That an acquittal, merely in 
the abfence of accufers, was very ill fitted to fatisfy 
the public ; efpecially if that abfence proceeded 
from a defigned precipitation of the fentence, and 
from the terror which her known friendfhip for the 
criminal had infufed into every one : That the very 
mention of her marriage to fuch a perfon, in fuch 
circumftances, was horrible ; and the contrivances 
of extorting a confent from the nobility, and of con- 
certing a rape, were grofs artifices, more proper to 
difcover her guilt than prove her innocence : That 
where a woman thus fhews a confcioufnefs of me- 
rited reproach, and, inftead of correcting, provides 
only tliin glolfes to cover her exceptionable eon- 
du6t, file betrays a negleCt of fame, which mufl 
either be the efi'eCt or the caufe of the moft fhame- 
ful enormities : That to efpoufe a man, who had, 
a few days before, been fo fcandalouHy divorced from 



ELIZABETH. 117 

his wife ; who, to fay the leafl:, was believed to r h a. p. 
have, a few months before, aflaffinatcd her hufband ; .^^^^j 
was fo contrary to the plainell rules of behaviour, that "^1367. 
no pretence of indifcretion or imprudence could ac- 
count for fuch a condud: That a woman, who, fo foon 
after her hufband's death, though not attended with 
any extraordinary circumftances, contrafts a mar- 
riage, which might in itfelf be the mod biamelefs, 
cannot efcape fevere cenfure; but one who overlooks, 
for her pleafure, fo many other weighty confider- 
ations, was equally capable, in gratifying her appe- 
tites, to negleft every regard to honour and to hu- 
manity : That Mary was not ignorant of the pre- 
vailing opinion of the public, with regard to her own 
guilt, and of the inferences which would every where 
be drawn from her conduft ; and therefore, if fhe 
flill continued to purfue meafures which gave fuch 
juft offence, fhe ratified, by her actions, as much as 
Ihe could by the mofl formal confeflion, all the fur- 
mifes and imputations of her enemies : That a prince 
was here murdered in the face of the world ; Both- 
wel alone was fufpefted and accufed ; if he were in- 
nocent, nothing could abfolve him, either in Mary*s 
eyes or thofe of the public, but the deteftion and 
convi6lion of the real affaffin ; yet no inquiry was 
made to that purpofe, though a parliament had been 
affembled ; the fovereign and wife was here plainly 
filent from guilt, the people from terror . That the 
only circumftance which oppofed all thefe prefump- 
tions, or rather proofs, was the benignity and good- 
nefs of her preceding behaviour, which feemed to 
remove her from all fufpicions of fuch atrocious in- 
humanity ; but that the characters of men were ex- 
tremely variable, and perfons guilty of the worft 
aftions were not always of the worfi and moft cri- 
minal difpofitions : That a woman who, iu a critical 
and dangerous moment, had facrificed her honour to 
a man of abandoned principle, might thenceforth be 

I 3 led 



ii8 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, led blindfold by him to the commiffion of the mofl 
^^^^^^^ enormous crimes, and was in reality no longer at 
,^67. her own difpofal : And that, though one fuppofition. 
was flill left to alleviate her blame, namely, that Both- 
wel, prefuniing on her affeftion towards him, had of 
himfelf committed the crim.e, and had never com- 
municated it to her, yet fuch a fudden and paffionate 
love to a man, whom fhe had long known, could not 
eafily be accounted for, without fuppofmg fome de- 
gree of preceding guilt ; and as it appeared that (he 
was not afterwards reftrained, either by Iham'e or 
prudence, from incurring the higheil reproach and 
danger, it was not likely that a fenfe of duty or 
humanity would have a more powerful influence 
over her. 

These were the fentiments which prevailed 
throughout Scotland ; and as the proteftant teach- 
ers, who had great authority, had long borne an 
animofity to Mary, the ophiion of her guilt was, 
by that means, the more widely diffufed, and made 
the deeper impreflion on the people. Some attempts 
made by Bothwel, and, as is pretended, with her 
confent, to get the young ' prince into his power, 
excited the nioft ferious attention ; and the principal 
nobility, even many of thole who had formerly been 
, condrained to fign the application in favour of Both- 
wel's marriage, met at Stirling, and formed an alTo- 
ciation for proteding the prince, and punilhing the 
king's murderers ''. The earl ot Athole himfelf, a 
known catholic, was the firfl author of this confede- 
racy : The earls of Argyle, Morton, Marre, Glen- 
carne, the lords Boyd, Lindefey, Hume, Semple, 
Kirkaldy of Grange, Tulibardine, and fecretary Lid- 
dington, entered zealoufly into it. The earl of Mur- 
ray, forefeeing fuch turbulent times, and being de- 
firous to keep free of thefe dangerous fai^ions, had, 

« Keith, p. 394.. 

fgmc 



ELIZABETH. 119 

fome time before, defired and obtained Mary's per- c Ti A P. 
miffion to retire into France. \X.xkvc. 

Lord Hume was firft in arms ; and, leading a j,^^, 
body of eight hundred horfe, fuddenly environed the ii'Turrec- 
queen of Scots and Bothwel in the caitle of Borth- !!°"V", 
"wic. 1 hey round means or makmg their eicape to 
Dunbar ; while the confederate lords were affembling 
their troops at Edinburgh, and taking meafures to 
effed: their purpofe. Had Bothwel been fo prudent 
as to keep within the fortrefs of Dunbar, his enemies 
muft have difperfed for want of pay and fubfillence ; 
but hearing that the aflbciated lords were fallen into ^ 
diflrefs, he was fo rafh as to take the field, and ad- 15th June, 
vance towards them. The armies met at Carberry 
Hill, about fix miles from Edinburgh ; and Mary 
foon became fenfible that her own troops difapprovcd 
of her caufe, and were averfe to fpili their blood in 
the quarrel ^ After fome bravadoes of Bothwel, 
where he difcovered very little courage, fhe faw no 
refource but that of holding a conference with Kir- 
kaldy of Grange, and of putting herfelf, upon fome 
general promifes, into the hands of the confederate?. 
She was conducted to Edinburgh, amidft the inliiliB 
of the populace ; who reproached her with her crimes ^ 
and even held before her eyes, which way foever Ihe 
turned, a banner, on which were painted the murder 
of her hufband, and the di/lrefs of her infant fon ^, 
Mary, overwhelmed with her calamities, had recourfe 
to tears and lamentations. Meanwhile Bothwel, 
during her conference with Grange, fled unattended 
to Dunbar j and fitting out a few fmall Aips, fet fail 
for the Orkneys, where he fubfifted during fome 
time by piracy. He was purfued thither by Grange, 
and his fliip was taken, with feveral of his fervants, 
who afterwards difcovered all the circumftances of 
the king's murder, anjd were punifhed for the 

f Keitli,p. 4.02. Spotfwood, p. 207. S Melvil, p. S3, S4.. 

I 4 crime. 



120 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, crime ''. Bothwel himfelf efcaped in a boat, and 
^^^^^ found means to get a paflage to Denmark, where he 
J .g,^ was thrown into prifon, loft his fenfes, and died mi- 
ferably about ten years after : An end worthy of his 
flagitious conduct and behaviour. 
Impnfon- The queen of Scots, now in the hands of an en- 
ment of j-^ged fadion, met with fuch treatment as a fovereign 
may naturally expedl from fubjeds who have their 
future fecurity to provide for, as well as their prefent 
animofity to gratify. It is pretended, that flie be- 
haved with a fpirit very httle fuitable to her condi' 
tion, avowed her inviolable attachment to Bothwel ', 
aed even wrote him a letter, which the lords inter- 
cepted, wherein fhe declared, that flie would endure 
any extremity, nay refign her dignity and crown it- 
feif, rather than relinquifli his affedions ^. The mal- 
contents, finding the danger to v/hich they were ex- 
pofed, in cafe Mary fhould finally prevail, thought 
themfelves obliged to proceed with rigour againft 
her ; and they lent her next day under a guard to 
the caftle of Lochlevin, fituated in a lake of that 
name. The miftrefs of the houfe was mother to 
the earl of Murray ; and as fhe pretended to have been 
lawfully married to the late king of Scots, fhe natu- 
rally bore an animofity to Mary, and treated her 
with the utmofl harfhnefs and feverity. 

Eliz-^beth, who was fully informed of all thefe 
incidents, feemed touched with compafTion towards 
the unfortunate queen ; and all her fears and jea- 
loufies being now laid afleep, by the confideration 
of that ruin and infamy in which Mary's conduft had 
involved her, fhe began to refieft on the inftability of 
human affairs, the precarious flate of royal grandeur, 

h Anderfon, vol. ii p. ifii;, i66, &c. J Keith, p. 419. 

^ Melvil, p. 84. The reality of this letter appears ioiiiewhat dil- 
putable ; chicfl) btcaufe Murray and his aflbciates never mentioned it 
in their accufation of her before queen Elizabeth's commiiTioners. 
I 

the 



1567- 



ELIZABETH. y^i 

the danger of encouraging rebellious fubje^ls ; and chap. 
fhe refolved to employ her pin'-, rity for alleviating xxxix. 
the calamities of her uiiiiappy kinfwoman. She fent * 
fir Nicholas Throgmorton ambaffador to Scotland, 
in order to remonftrate both with Mary and the af- 
fociated lords ; and fhe gave him inilrudions, which, 
though mixed with fome lofty pretenfions, were full 
of that good fenfe which were fo natural to her, and 
of that generofity which the prefent interefting con- 
junfture had called forth. She empowered him to 
declare in her name to Mary, that the late conduct 
of that princefs, fo enormous and in every refpedl 
fo unjuflifiable, had given her the higheft offence; 
and though fhe felt the movements of pity towards 
her, fhe had once determined never to interpofe in 
her affairs, either by advice or afTiflance, but to aban- 
don her entirely, as a perfon whofe condition was to- 
tally defperate, and honour irretrievable : That fhe 
was well affured that other foreign princes, Mary's 
near relations, had embraced the fame refolution; 
but, for her part, the late events had touched her 
heart with more tender fympathy, and had made 
her adopt meafures more favourable to the liberty 
and interefls of the unhappy queen : That fhe was 
determined not to fee her oppreffed by her rebellious 
fubjedts, but would employ all her good offices, and 
even her power, to redeem her from captivity, and 
place her in fuch a condition as would at once be 
compatible with her dignity, and the fafety of her 
fubjeds: That flie conjured her to lay afide all 
thoughts of revenge, except againft the murderers 
of her hufband ; and as flie herfelf was his near re- 
lation, fhe was better entitled than the fubjefts of 
Mary, to interpofe her authority on that head ; and 
fhe therefore befought that princefs, if flie had any ^ 
regard to her own honour and fafety, not to oppofe 
fo jufl and reafonable a demand: That after thofe 
two points were provided for, her own liberty, and 

the 



122 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, the pulfhment of her hufband*s aflailins, the fafety 
^^^,^^ of her infant fon was next to be confidered; and 
,^67_ there feemed no expedient more proper for that pur- 
pofe, than fending him to be educated in England : 
And that, befides the fecurity which would attend 
his removal from a fcene of fadion and convulfions, 
there were many other beneficial "confequences, 
which it was eafy to forefee as the refult of his 
education in that country '. 

The remonftrances which Throgmorton w^as In- 
flru(^ed to make to the aifociated lords, were en- 
tirely conformable to thefe fenthnents which Eliza- 
beth entertained in Mary's favour. She empowered 
him to teh them, that, whatever blame fhe might 
throw on Mary's conduft, any oppofition to their 
fovereign was totally unjuftifiable, and incompatible 
with all order and good government : That it be- 
longed not to them to reform, much lefs to punifli, 
the mal-adminiftration of their prince ; and the only 
arms which fubjeds could in any cafe lawfully em- 
ploy againfi the fupreme authority, were entreaties, 
counfels, and reprefentations : That if thefe expe- 
dients failed, they were next to appeal by their 
prayers to Heaven ; and to wait with patience till 
the Almighty, in whofe hands are the hearts of 
princes, fliould be pleafed to turn them to juftice and 
to mercy : That flie inculcated not this doclrine, 
becaufe flie herfelf was interefted in its obfervance ; 
biit becaufe it was univerfally received in all well- 
governed ffates, and was elVential to the preferv- 
ation of civil fociety : That fhe required them to 
reftore their quedn to liberty ; and promifed, in that 
cafe, to concur with them in all proper expedients 
for regulating the government, for punilhing the 
king's murderers, .and for guarding the life and 
liberty of the infant prince : And that if the fervices^ 

^ Keith, p. 411, 412, &c. 

%vhich 



ELIZABETH. 123 

which fhe had lately rendered the ScottlHi nation, m chap. 
prote6ting them from foreign ufurpiition, were duly ^^^^j^ 
confidered by them, they would repofe confidence j^^^, 
in her good offices, and would efteem themfelves 
blame-worthy in having hitherto made no applica- 
tion to her ". 

Elizabeth, befides thefe remonflrances, fent, 
by Throgmorton, fome articles of accommodation, 
which he was to propofe to both parties, as expe- 
dients for the fettlement of public affairs ; and though 
thefe articles contained fome important reltraints on 
the fovereign power, they were in the main calcu- 
lated for Mary's advantage, and were fufficiently in- 
dulgent to her". The alTociated lords, who deter- 
mined to proceed with greater feverity, were appre- 
henfive of ^Elizabeth's partiality ; and being fenfible 
that Mary would take courage from the protection 
of that powerful princefs °, they thought proper, 
after feveral affeded delays, to refufe the Englifh 
ambaflador all accefs to her. There were four dif- 
ferent fchemes propofed in Scotland, for the treat- 
pient of the captive queen : One, that (lie (hould be 
reltored to her authority under very drift hmita- 
tions : The fecond^ that fhe fhould be obliged to re- 
fign her crown to the prince, be banifhed the king- 
dom, and be confined either to France or England ; 
"with afTurances from the fovereign in whole domi- 
nions fhe fliould refide, that fhe fhould make no at- 
tempts to the difturbance of the eftabliflied govern- 
ment : The third, that flie fhould be publicly tried 
for her crimes, of which her enemies pretended to 
have undoubted proof, and be fentenced to perpe- 
tual imprifonment : The fourth was ftill more fevere, 
and required, that, after her trial and condemnation, 
capital punifhment fhould be infiifted upon her p. 
Throgmorton fupported the mlldefl propofal ; but 
though he promifed his miflrefs's guarantee for the 

• Keith, p. 4i4j 415, ^jj, n Ibid. p. 416. 

f Jbidf f . J^ij, P Ibid. p. 420. 

performance 



124 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

c K A P. performance of articles, threatened the ruling party 
^^^^^^f^ with immediate vengeance in cafe of refufal % an4 
JJ67. warned them not to draw on themfelves, by their 
violence, the public reproach, which now lay upon 
their queen ; he found that, excepting fecretary 
Lidington, he had not the good fortune to convince 
any of the leaders. All counfels feemed to tend to- 
wards the more fevere expedients ; and the preachers, 
in particular, drawing their examples from the ri- 
gorous maxims of the Old Teilament, v/hich can 
only be warranted by particular revelations, inflamed 
the minds of the people againft their unhappy fove- 
reign '. 

There were fever al pretenders to the regency of 
^ the young prince after the intended depofition of 

Mary. The earl of Lenox claimed that authority 
as grandfather to the prince : The duke of Chatel- 
rault, who was abfentin France, had pretenfions as 
next heir to the crown : But the greatefl number of 
the affociated lords inclined to the earl of Murray, 
in whofe capacity they had entire trufl, and who 
pofleiTed the confidence of the preachers and more 
zealous reformers. All meafures being therefore 
concerted, three inflruments were fent to Mary, by 
the hands of lord Lindefey, and hr Robert Melvil ; 
by one of which fire was to refign the crown in fa- 
vour of her fon, by another to appoint Murray re- 
gent, by the third to make a council which Ihould 
adminifter the government until his arrival in Scot- 
land. - The queen of Scots, feeing no profpect of 
relief, lying juftly under apprehenfions for her life, 
and believing that no deed which fhe executed du- 
ring her captivity could be valid, was prevailed on, 
after a plentiful effufion of tears, to fign thefe three 
inflruments ; and fhe took not the trouble of in- 
fpe«5ling any one of them % In confequence of this 

^ Keith, p. 428. ' Ibid, p 421. 426. 

» Melvil, j>. 85. Spotfwood, p. an. Andeil'on, vol. ill. p. 19. 

forced 



ELIZABETH. 125 

forced refignation, the young prince was proclaimed chap. 
king, by the name of James VI. He was foon after /^^^^i^ 
crowned at Stirling, and the earl of Morton took ,567. 
in his name the coronation oath ; in which a pro- 29^11 J"'7» 
mife to extirpate hercfy was not forgotten. Some 
republican pretenfions in favour of the people's 
power were countenanced in this ceremony ' ; and 
a coin was foon after ftruck, on which the famous 
faying of Trajan was infcribed, Pro me ; Ji ?nerear, 
in ?ne : For me ; if I deferve it, againft: me ". 
Throgmorton had orders from his miftrefs not to 
aflifl: at the coronation of the king of Scots ""» 
*> The council of regency had not long occafion to 
exercife their authority. The earl of Murray ar- 
rived from France, and took polTeffion of his high 
office. He paid a vifit to the captive queen ; and 
fpoke to her in a manner which better fuited her 
paft conduct than her prefent condition. This harlh 
treatment quite extinguiOied in her' breaft any re- 
mains of affedion towards him''. Murray proceeded 
afterwards to break, in a more public •Jiianner, all 
terms of decency with her. He fummoned a parlia-" 15th Dec 
ment ; and that alfembly, after voting that fhe was 
undoubtedly an accomplice in her hufband's mur- 
der, condemned her to imprifonment, ratified her 
demiffion of the crown, and acknowledged her fon 
for king and Murray for regent ^. The regent, a 
man of vigour and abilities, employed himfelf fuc- 
cefsfuUy in reducing the kingdom. He bribed fir 
James Balfour to furrender the caille of Edinburgh : 
He conftrained the garrifon of Dunbar to open their 
gates : And he demolilhed that fortrefs. 

But though every thing thus bore a favourable 
afped to the new government, and all men feemed 

* Keith, p. 439, 44.0. « Ibid, p. 440. Append, p. 150. 

w {bid. p. 430. f Melvil, p. 87. Keith, p. 445. 

T Anderfon, vol. ii. p. 206 & feq. 

g to 



126 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, to acqulefce in Murray's authority ; a violent revolu- 
^^^^^j[5\ tlon, however neceffary, can never be efFefted with- 
,^67. out great difcontents ; and it was not hkely that, in 
a country where the government, in its moft fettled 
ftate, poflelTed a very disjointed authority, a new 
eflablilhment fiiould meet with no interruption or 
difturbance. Few confiderable men of the nation 
feemed willing to fupport Mary, fo long as Both- 
wel v.'ns prefent ; but the removal of that obnoxious 
nobleman had altered the fc.itiments of many. The 
duke of Chatelrault, being difappointed of the re- 
gency, bore no good-will to Murray ; and the fame 
fentiments were embraced by all his numerous re- 
tainers . Several of the nobility, finding that others 
had taken the lead among the aifociators, formed a 
fadion apart, and oppofed the prevailing power : 
And befides their being moved by fome remains of 
duty and aifeclion towards Mary, the malcontent 
lords, obferving every thing carried to extremity 
againft her, were naturally led to embrace her caufe, 
and fhelter themfelves under her authority. All who 
letained any propenfity to the catholic religion, were 
induced to join this party ; and even the people in 
general, though they had formerly either detefted 
Mary's crimes, or blamxcd her imprudence, were now 
inclined to compaffionate her prefent fituation, and 
lamented that a perfon, poiTeffed of fo many amiable 
accompHfliments, joined to fuch high dignity, fhould 
be treated with fuch extreme feverity ^. Animated 
by all thefe motives, many of the principal nobility, 
now adherents to the queen of Scots, met at Hamil- 
ton, and concerted meafures for fupporting the caufe 
'of that princefs. 
156S. While thefe humours were In fermentation, Mary 

was employed in contrivances for effefting her efcape ; 
and Ihe engaged, by her charms and carelfes, a young 

^ Buchanan, lib. xviii, c, 53, 

gentleman. 



ELIZABETH. 127 

gentleman, George Douglas, brother to the laird of C H a p. , 
Lochlevin, to aflift her in that enterprife. She even ^^™^ 
went fo far as to give him hopes of efpoufmg her, ,^^8. 
after her marriage with Bothwel fliould be diifolved 
on the plea of force ; and fhe propofed this expe- 
dient to the regent, who rejefted it. Douglas, how- 
ever, perfevered in his endeavours to free her from 
captivity ; and having all opportunities of accefs to 
the houfe, he was at laft fuccefsful in the undertak- 
ing. He conveyed her in difguife into a fmall boat, td May, 
and himfelf rowed her afliore. She haftened to Ha- 
milton ; and the news of her arrival in that place 
being immediately fpread abroad, many of the no- 
bility flocked to her with their forces. A bond of 
aflbciation for her defence was figned by the earls of 
Argyle, Huntley, Eglington, Crawford, Callilis, 
Rothes, Montrofe, Sutherland, Errol, nine billiops, 
and nine barons, befides many of the moft confider- 
able gentry *. And in a few days an army, to the 
number of fix thoufand men, was aflembled under 
her ftandard. 

Elizabeth was no fooner informed of Mary's 
efcape, than fhe discovered her' refolution of perfe- 
vering in the fame generous and friendly meafures 
which fhe had hitherto purfued. If fhe had not em- 
ployed force againfl the regent, during the impri- 
ibnment of that princefs, fhe had been chiefly with- 
held by the fear of pufliing him to greater ex- 
tremities againfl her ^ ; but fhe had propofed to the 
court of France an expedient, which, though lefs vi- 
olent, would have been no lefs effectual for her fer* 
vice : She defired that France and England fhould 
by concert cut off all commerce with the Scots, till 
they fhould do juflice to their injured fovereign*". 
She now difpatched Leighton into Scotland to offer 
both her good offices, and the afTiflance of her forces, 

» Keith, p. 475* ^ Ibid. p. 4.63. Cabala, p. 141. 

« Keith, p. 4C», 

to 



,28 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, to Mary ; but as fhe apprehended the entrance of 

XXXIX. French troops into the kingdom, fhe defired that 

J w^g the controverfy between the queen of Scots and her 

fubjefts might by iJiat princefs be referred entirely 

to her arbitration, and that no foreign fuccours 

fhould be introduced into Scotland **. 

But Elizabeth had not leifure to exert fully her 
• efforts in favour of Mary. The regent made hafte 
to aflemble forces ; and notwithftanding that his 
army was inferior in number to that of the queen of 
«5tb May. Scots, he took the field againft her. A battle was 
fought at Langfide near Glafgow, which was entirely 
decifive in favour of the regent ; and though Murray, 
after his viftory, flopped the bloodfhed, yet was the 
aftion followed by a total difperfion of the queen's 
Mary flies party. That unhappy princefs fled fouthwards from 
into Eng- |.|^g i^gj^ Qf battle with great precipitation, and came, 
with a few attendants, to the borders of England. 
She here deliberated concerning her next meafures^ 
which would probably prove fo important to her fu- 
ture happinefs or mifery. She found it impoflible to 
remain in her own kingdom : She had an averfion, 
in her prefent wretched condition, to return int^ 
France, where flie had formerly appeared with fo 
much fplendour ; and flie was not, befides, provided 
with a veifel which could fafely convey her thither : 
The late generous behaviour of Elizabeth made her 
hope for proteclion, and even afiiflance, from that 
quarter ^ ; and as the prefent fears from her domeflic 
enemies were the mofl urgent, fhe overlooked all 
other conliderations, and embraced the refolution of 
taking flicker in England. She embarked on board 
a fifliing-boat in Galloway, and landed the fame day 
at Workington in Cumberland, about thirty miles 
from Carlifle ; whence fhe immediately difpatched a 
melfenger to London ; notifying her arrival, defiring 

^ Keith, p. 473. in tlie notes. Anderfon, vol. iv. p. a6. 
« Jebb'a Colltdion, vol. i. p. 4x0, 

leave 




•ti-A-izra' J'rn^t 



S'/ii-rrth J'rt^.' 



JobMhi-il 1.V Tlu'. l'ad.-Tl Slriiii.l.U Jam- iVoo . 



ELIZABETH. 129 

leave to vifit Elizabeth, and craving her protedlon, c ri a p. 
in confequence of former profeflions of friendlliip ,^^^^^^^ 
made her by that princefs. ^^ci, ' 

Elizabeth now found herfelf in a fituation 
when it was become neceflary to take fome declfive 
refolution with regard to her treatment of the queen 
of Scots ; and as fhe had hitherto, contrary to the 
opinion of Cecil, attended more to the motives of 
generofity than of policy ^, flie was engaged by that 
prudent niinifter to weigh anew all the confiderations 
which occurred in this critical conjuncture. He re- 
prefented, that the party which had dethroned Mary, 
and had at prefent affumed the government of Scot- 
land, was always attached to the Englifh alliance, 
and was engaged, by all the motives of religion and 
of intereft, to perfevere in their connection with 
Elizabeth : That though Murray and his friends 
might complain of fome unkind ufage during their 
banifhment in England, they would eafdy forget 
thefe grounds of quarrel, when they reiieded that 
Elizabeth was the only ally on whom they could 
fafely rely, and that their own queen, by her attach- 
ment to the catholic faith, and by her other connec- 
tions, excluded them entirely from the friendfhip of 
France, and even from that of Spain : That Mary, 
on the other hand, even before her violent breach 
with her proteftant fubjeds, was in fecret entirely 
governed by the counlels of the houfe of Guife ; 
much more would ihe implicitly comply with their 
views, when, by her own ill conduci:, the power of 
that family and of the zealous catholics was become 
her fole refource and fecurity : That her pretenlions 
to the EngUfh crown would render her a dangerous 
inftrument m their hands ; and, were fhe once able 
to fupprefs the proteflants In her own kingdom, flie 
would unite the Scottifli and Englifh catholics, with 
thofe of all foreign flates, in a confederacy agalnfl 

^ Cabala, p. 140, 1 

Vol. V. K the 



130 HISTORY OF ENGLAND 

CHAP, the religion and 8:o\ernment of England : That k 
xxxix. beJ-^Qved Elizabeth, therefore, to proceed with can- 
j^og, tion in the defign of reftoring her rival to the 
throne ; and to take care, both that this enterprife, ' 
if undertaken, fliould be effe6led by Englifh forces 
alone, and that full fecurities fhould beforehand be 
provided for the reformers and the reformation in 
Scotland : That above all, it was necefiary to guard 
carefully the perfon of that princefs ; left, finding 
this unexpefted referve in the Englifh friendftiip, 
fhe fhould fuddeniy take the refolution of flying 
into France, and fhould attempt, by foreign force, 
to recover poiTeiTion of her authority : That her 
defperate fortunes and broken reputation fitted her 
for any attempt ; and her refentment, when flie 
fhould find herfelf thus deferted by the queen, 
would concur with her ambition and her bigotry, 
and render her an unrelenting, as well as power- 
ful enemy to the Englifli government : That if 
fhe were once abroad, in the hands of enterprifing 
catholics, the attack on England would appear to 
her as eafy as that on Scotland ; and the only me- 
thod, fhe muft imagine, of recovering her native 
kingdom, would be to acquire that crown, to which 
fhe would deem herfelf equally entitled : That a 
neutrality in fuch interefting fituations, though it 
might be pretended, could never, without the moft 
extreme danger, be upheld by the queen ; and the 
detention of Mary was equally requifite, whether the 
power of England were to be employed in her fa- 
vour, or againft her : That nothing, indeed, was 
more becoming a great prince than generofity ; yet 
the fuggeftion^ of this noble principle could never, 
without imprudence, be confulted in fuch delicate 
circumftances as thofe in which the queen was at 
prefent placed ; where her own fafcty and the inte- 
refls of her people were intimately concerned in 
every refolution which fhe embraced : That though 
the example of fuccefsful rebellion, efpecially in a 
8 neigh- 



ELIZABETH. 131 

heighbouring country, could nowife be agreeable chap. 
to any fovereign, yet Mary's imprudence had been ^'^^i^- 
fo great, perhaps her crimes fo enormous, that ^"^'^T^i^" 
the infurreftion of fubjefts, after fuch provocation, 
could no longer be regarded as a precedent againfl 
other princes : That it was firfl neceffary for Eliza- 
beth to afcertain, in a regular and fatisfaclory man- 
ner, the extent of Mary's guilt, and thence to de- 
termine the degree of proteftion which Ihe ought to 
afford her againfl her difcontented fubje6ls : That as 
no glory could furpafs that of defending oppreffed 
innocence, it was equally infamous to patronize vice 
and murder on the throne ; and the contagion of 
fuch difhonour would extend itfelf to all who coun.^ 
tenanced or fupported it : And that, if the crimes 
of the Scottifh princefs fhould, on inquiry, appear as 
great and certain as was affirmed and believed, every 
meafure againfl her, which policy fliould dictate. 
Would thence be juflified ; or if fhe fhould be found 
innocent, every enterprife, which friendfhip fhould 
infpire, would be acknowledged laudable and glo- 
rious. 

Agreeably to thefe views, EHzabeth refolved to 
proceed in a feemingly generous, but really cautious, 
manner with the queen of Scots ; and fhe imme- 
diately fent orders to lady Scrope, filler to the duke 
of Norfolk, a lady who lived in the neighbourhood, 
to attend on that princefs. Soon after, fhe dif^ 
patched to her lord Scrope himfelf, warden of the 
marches, and fir Francis Knolles, vice-chamberlain. 
They found Mary already lodged in the caflle of 
CarUlle ; and, after exprelling the queen's fympathy 
with her in her late misfortunes, they told her, that 
her requeft of being allowed to vifit their fovereign, 
and of being admitted to her prefence, could not at 
prefent be compUed with : Till fne had cleared her- 
felf of her hufband's murder, of which fhe was fo 
ftrongly accufed, Elizabeth could not, without dif- 
K 3 honour 3 



132 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, honour, (hew her any countenance, or appear m* 
XXXIX. (5}ffei-ent to the aflaflination of fo near a kinfman ^. 
1568. So unexpe6led a check threw Mary into tears ; and 
the neceffity of her fituation extorted from her a 
declaration, that fhe would willingly juftify herfelf 
to her fifter from all imputations, and would fubmit 
her caufe to the arbitration of fo good a friend ''. 
Two days after fhe fent lord Herreis to London, 
with a letter to the fame purpofe. 

Tpiis conceihon, which Mary could fcarcely 
avoid without an acknowledgment of guilt, was 
the point expefted and defired by Elizabeth : She 
immediately difpatched Midlemore to the regent of 
Scotland ; requiring him both to defifl: from the 
farther profecution of his queen's party, and fend 
fome perfons to London to juflify his conduft with 
regard to her. Murray might juftly be ftartled at 
receiving a melTage fo violent and imperious ; but 
as his domeflic enemies were numerous and power- 
ful, and England was the fole ally which he could 
expect among foreign nations, he was refolved ra- 
ther to digeft the atfront, than provoke Elizabeth 
by a refufal. He alfo confidered, that though that 
queen had hitherto appeared partial to Mary, 
many political motives evidently engaged her to 
fupport the king's caufe in Scotland j and it was 
not to be doubted but fo penetrating a princefs 
would in the end difcover this intereft, and would 
at lead afford him a patient and equitable hearing. 
He therefore replied, that he would himfelf take a 
journey to England, attended by other commif- 
fioners ; and would willingly fubmit the determin- 
ation of his caufe to Elizabeth '. 

Lord Herreis now perceived that his miflrefs 
had advanced too far in her concellions : He en- 
deavoured to maintain, that Mary could not, with- 

S Andeifon, vol. iv. p. 54. 66. 82| 83. 86. 

^ Ibid. p. 10. 55. 87. * Ibid, p. 13—16. 

out 



ELIZABETH. 



'33 



out diminution of her royal dignity, fubmit to a CHAP. 
contefl with her rebellious fubjeds before a foreign ?^'^i^,i^ 
prince; and he required either prefent aid from j.^g^ 
England, or liberty for his queen to pafs over into 
France. Being prefled, however, with the former 
agreement before the Englifh council,, he again re- 
newed his confent ; but in a few days he began anew 
to recoil ; and it was with fome difficulty that he 
was brought to acquiefce in the firft determination ''. 
Thefe fluftuations, which were inceffantly renewed, 
fliewed his vifible reludance to the meafures purfued 
by the court of England. 

The queen of Scots difcovered no lefs averfion 
to the trial propofed ; and it required all the artifice 
and prudence of Elizabeth to make her perfevere in 
the agreement to w^hich fhe at firft confented. This 
latter princefs ftill faid to her, that fhe defired not, 
without Mary's confent or approbation, to enter 
into the queftion, and pretended only, as a friend, 
to hear her juftification : That flie was confident 
there would be found no difficulty in refuting all 
the calumnies of her enemies ; and even if her apo- 
logy fhould fall fhort of full conviction, EHzabeth 
was determined to fupport her caufe, and procure 
her fome reafonable terms of accommodation : And 
that it was never meant, that fhe fliould be cited to 
a trial on the accufation of her rebellious fubjeds ; 
but, on the contrary, that they fhould be fummoned 
to appear, and to juftify themfelves for their coududl 
towards her \ Allured by thefe plaufible profeffions, 
the queen of Scots agreed to vindicate herfelf by 
her own commiffioners before commiffioners ap- 
pointed by Elizabeth. 

During thefe tranfa(fl:ions, lord Scrope and fir 
Francis Knolles, who refided with Mary at Carlifle, 
had leifure to ftudy her charader, and make report 
of it to Elizabeth. Unbroken by her misfortunes, 

*^ Anderfonj p. i6— zo. ' Ibid. p. ii, 12, 13. 109, no. 

, K 3 refolute 



134 

CHAP. 
XXXIX. 



Confer- 
ences at 
York and 
Jlainpton- 
court. 



HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

refolute in her.purpofe, aftive in her enterprifes, fhe 
afpired to nothing but victory ; and was determine4 
to endure any extremity, to undergo any difficulty, 
and to try every fortune, rather than abandon her 
caufe, or yield the fuperiority to her enemies. Elo-. 
quent, inlinuating, affable ; fhe had already con^ 
vinced all thofe who approached her, of the inno-^ 
cence of her paft conduft ; and as fhe declared her 
fixed purpofe to require aid of her friends all over 
Europe, and even to have recourfe to infidels and 
barbarians, rather than fail of vengeance againft her 
perfecutors, it was eafy to forefee the danger to 
which her charms, her fpirit, her addrefs, if allowed 
to operate with their full force, would expofe them "*, 
The court of England, therefore, who, under pre- 
tence of guarding her, had already, in effeft, de- 
tained her prifoner, were determined to watch her 
with greater vigilance. As Carlifle, by its fituation 
on the borders, afforded her great opportunities of 
contriving her efcape, they removed her to Bolton, 
a feat of lord Scrope*s in Yorkfhire : And the iffue 
of the controverfy between her and the Scottifh na- 
tion was regarded as a fubje^l more momentous to 
Elizabeth's fecurity and interefls, than it had hi-^ 
therto been apprehended. 

The commiffioners appointed by the Englifli 
court for the examination of this great caufe, were 
the duke of Norfolk, the earl of Suffex, and fir 
R^^ph Sadler ; and York was named as the place of 
conference. Leiley bilhop of Rofs, the lords Her- 
reis, Lcvingftone, and Boyde, with three perfons 
more, appeared as commiffioners from the queen 
of Scots. I he earl of Murray, regent, the earl of 
Morton, the bifliop of Orkney, lord Lindefey, and 
the abbot of Durifermling, were appointed commif- 
fioners from the king and kingdom of Scotland. 
Secretary Lidington, George Buchanan, the famous 



«> Ancjerfon, vol. iv. p. 54.. 71, 72. 74.. 78. 92. 



foe^ 



•ELIZABETH. 



135 



poet and hiflorian, with fome others, were named as chap, 
their afiiftants. ^j^^^ 

It was a great circumftance in Elizabeth's glory, j^^g, 
that fhe was thus chofen umpire between the fac- 
tions of a neighbouring kingdom, which had, du- 
ring many centuries, entertained the mod violent 
jealoufy and animofity againft England ; and her 
felicity was equally rare, in having the fortunes and 
fame of fo dangerous a rival, who had long given 
her the greatefl inquietude, now entirely at her dif- 
pofal. Some circumftances of her late conduft had 
difcovered a bias towards the fide of Mary : Her 
prevailing interefts led her to favour the enemies of 
that princefs : The profeffions of impartiality, which 
fhe had made, were open and frequent ; and ihe had 
fo far fucceeded, that each fide accufed her commif- 
fioners of partiality towards their adverfaries ". She 
herfelf appears, by the inflrudions given them, to 
have fixed no plan for the decifion ; but fhe knew 
that the advantages which flie fnould reap, mufi: be 
great, whatever iiTue the caufe might take. If Ma- 
ry's crimes could be afcertained by undoubted proof, 
fhe could for ever blaft the reputation of that prin- 
cefs, and might juftifiably detain her for ever a pri- 
foner in England : If the evidence fell fhort of con- 
viction, it was intended to reftore her to the throne, 
but with fuch flrict limitations as would leave Eli- 
zabeth perpetual arbiter of all differences between 
the parties in Scotland, and render her in efieCl ab- 
folute miftrefs of the kingdom ° 

Mary's commiHioners, before they gave in their 
complaints againft her enemies in Scotland, entered 
a proteft, that their appearance in the caufe fhould 
no wife affe£t the independence of her crown, or be 
conflrued as a mark of fubordination to England : 
The EngUfh con^mifTioners received this proteft, 

> n Anderfon, vol. W. part s. p. 43. » Ibid. 14., 15, &c. 

Goodall, vol. ii. ^^, no, 

K 4 but 



136 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, but with a referve to the claim of England. The 
^^^^^^ complaint of that princefs was next read, and con- 
" J568. tained a detail of the injuries which fhe had fuffered. 
fince her marriage with Bothwel : That her fubje^bs 
had taken arms againfl her, on pretence of freeing 
her from captivity ; and when fhe put herfelf into 
their hands, they had committed her to clofe cuftody 
in Lochlevin ; had placed her fon, an infant, on her 
throne ; had again, takers arms againfl: her after her 
deliverance from prifon ; had rejected all her pro,, 
pofals for accommodation ; had given battle to her 
troops ; and had obliged her, for the fafety of her 
perfon, to take flicker in England p. The earl of 
Murray, in anfwer to this complaint, gave a fum- 
mary and imperfeft account of the late tranfaftions : 
That the earl of Bothwel, the known murderer of 
the late king, had, a little after committing that 
crime, feized the perfon of the queen, and led her 
to Dunbar ; that he acquired fuch influence over 
her, as to gain her confent to marry him, and he 
had accordingly procured a divorce from his former 
wife, and had pretended to celebrate his nuptials 
with the queen ; that the fcandal of this tranfadion, 
the difhonour which it brought on the nation, the 
danger to which the infant prince was expofed from 
the attempts of that audacious man, had obliged the 
nobility to take arms, and expofe his criminal en- 
terprifes ; that after Mary, in order to fave him, 
had thrown herfelf into their hands, fhe flill dif- 
covered fuch a violent attachment to him, that they 
found it neceffary, for their own and the public 
fafety, to confine her perfon, during a feafon, till 
Bothwel and the other murderers of her hufband 
could be tried and puniflied for their crimes; and that, 
during this confinement, fhe had voluntarily, with- 
out compulfion or violence, merely from difgufl at 

P Andeffon, vol* iv. part j,« p. 55i Gocdall, vol. ii. p. iaS« 
HayiisSj p. 4.78, 

th^ 



ELIZABETH. 137 

the inquietude and vexations attending power, re- c hap. 
figned her crown to her only fon, and had appointed ^^^ xix. 
the earl of Murray regent during the minority''. .^(jj^ 
The queen's anfwer to this apology was obvious : 
That fhe did not know, and never could fufpeft, 
that.Bothwel, who had been acquitted by a jury, 
and recommended to her by all the nobility for her 
hufband, was the murderer of the king ; that fhe 
ever was, and ftill continues, defirous that if he be 
guilty he may be brought to condign punifhment ; 
that her refignation of the crown was extorted from 
her by the well grounded fears of her life, and even 
by direft menaces of violence ; and that Throg- 
morton, the Englifh ambaflador, as well as others 
of her friends, had advifed her to fign that paper, 
as the only means of faving herfelf from the laft ex- 
tremity, and had aflured her that a confent, given 
under thefe circumftances, could never have any 
validity •". 

So far the queen of Scots feemed plainly to have 
the advantage in the conteft : And the Englifh com- 
miflioners might have been furprifed that Murray 
had made fo weak a defence, and had fupprelTed all 
the material imputations againft that princefs, on 
which his party had ever fo ftrenuoufly infifted ; had 
not fome private conferences previoufly informed 
them of the fecret. Mary's commiffioners had 
boafled that Elizabeth, from regard to her kinf- 
woman, and from her defire of maintaining the 
rights of fovereigns, was determined, how criminal 
foever the conduct of that princefs might appear, to 
reflore her to the throne ' ; and Murray, refleding 
on fome pafl meafures of the Englifh court, began 
to apprehend that there were but too jufl grounds 
for thefe expeftations. He believed that Mary, if 
he would agree to conceal the moll violent part of 

1 Anderfon, vol. iv. part 2. p. 64. & feq. Goodall.vol. ii. p. 144.. 
' Anderfon, vol. iv. part a. p. 60. & feq. Goodall, vol. ii. p. i6z. 
9 Anderfon, vol. iv. part lo p. 45. Goodall, vol. ii. p. 127. 

the 



138 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, the accufation againft her, would fubmlt to any rea- 
^^^^^^ fonable terms of accommodation ; but if he once 
ij68. proceeded fo far as to charge her with the whole of 
her guih, no compofition could afterwards take 
place ; and fhould fhe ever be reftored, either by the 
power of Elizabeth, or the alliftance of her other 
friends, he and his party muft be expofed to her 
fevere and implacable vengeance '. He refolved, 
therefore, not to venture ralhly on a meafure which 
it would be impoffible for him ever to recall ; and 
he privately paid a vifit to Norfolk and the other 
Enghlh commillioneis, confeiled his fcruples, laid 
before them the evidence of the queen's guilt, and 
defired to have fome fecurity for Ehzabeth's pro- 
tection, in cafe that evidence fliould, upon examin- 
5ition, appear entirely fatisfadiory. Norfolk w^as not 
fecretly difplcafed with thefe fcruples of the regent ". 
He had ever been a partifan of the queen of Scots: 
Secretary Lidington, v/ho began alfo to incline to 
that party, and was a man of fmgular addrefs and 
capacity, had engaged him to embrace farther viev/s 
in her favour, and even to think of efpoufing her : 
And though that duke confeffed '% that the proofs 
againfl Mary feemed to be unqueftionable, he en- 
couraged Murray in his prefent refolution, not to 
produce them publicly in the conferences before the 
Englifii commiiiioners ". 

Norfolk', , -♦however, v/as obliged to tranfmit 
to court the queries propofed by the regent. Thefe 
queries cpnfifted of four particulars , Whether the 
Englifii commiiiioners had authority from their fove- 
reign to pronounce fentence againfl Mary, in cafe her 
guilt ihould be fully proved before them ? Whether 
they would promife to exercife that authority, and 
proceed to an actual fentence ? Whether the 

t Anderfon, vol. iv. part 2. p. 47, 4S. Goodall, vol. ii. p. 159, 
^ Crawf'oicl, p. 92. A-Ielvil, p. 94, 95, Haynes, p. 574. 
w Antlei-ron, vol. iv. pait 2. p. 77. ^ Ibid. p. 57. 77. 

State Trials, vol. i, p. 76, 

queen 



ELIZABETH. 



'39 



queen of Scots, if fhe were found guilty, jOhould be c h A p. 
delivered into the hands of the regent, or, at leafl, ^^^'^X- 
be fo fecured in England, that flie never Ihould be (,3^ 
able to diflurb the tranquillity of Scotland ? and. 
Whether Elizabeth would alfo, in that cafe, promife 
to acknowledge the young king, and protect the 
regent in his authority ^ ? 

Elizabeth, when thefe queries, with the other 
tranfaftions, were laid before her, began to think 
that they pointed towards a conclufion more decifive 
and more advantageous than fhe had hitherto ex- 
pected. She determined, therefore, to bring the 
matter into full light ; and under pretext that the 
diftance from her perfon retarded the proceedings of 
her commiffioners, flie ordered them to come to 
London, and there continue the conferences. On 
their appearance, fhe immediately joined in com- 
miflion with them fome of the moft confiderable of 
her council ; fir Nicholas Bacon, lord keeper, the 
earls of Arundel and Leicefter, lord Clinton, ad- 
miral, and fir William Cecil, fecretary^. The 
queen of Scots, who knew nothing of thefe fecret 
motives, and who expected that fear or decency 
would ftill reftrain Murray from prcceediiag to any 
violent accufation againft her, expreffed an entire 
fatisfaclion in this adjournment ; and de.clared that 
the affair, being under the immediate iiifpeftion of 
Elizabeth, was now in the hands where fhe moft 
defired to refl if*. The conferences v^ere accord- 
ingly contiiiued at Hampton-court ; and Mary's 
commiffioners, as before, made no fcrnple to be 
prefent at them. 

The queen, meanwhile, gave a fatisfaf toi-y anfwer 
to all Murray's demands, and declared, t hat though 
fire wiflied and hoped, from the prefent inquiry, to 

y Andeilbn, vol. iv. part z. p. 55. Goodall, vol. \ i. p. 130. 
» Anderfon, vol, iv. part a. p. 59. a ibjd. p. gj. Goodall, 

vol. ii. p. 177. 179. 

be 



140 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, be entirely convinced of Mary's innocence, yet if 
^^2^^[^ the event fliould prove contrary, and that princefs 
156S. fliould appear guilty of her hufband's murder, fhe 
fhould, for her own part, deem her ever after un- 
worthy of a throne ^ The regent, encouraged by 
this declaration, opened more fully his charge againft 
the queen of Scots, and, after expreffmg his re- 
luctance to proceed to that extremity, and protefting 
that nothing but the neceffity of felf-defence, which 
muft not be abandoned for any delicacy, could have 
engaged him in fuch a meafure, he proceeded to 
accufe her in plain terms of participation and con- 
fent In the aflalTmation of the king ". The earl of 
Lenox too appeared before the Englifh commiffion- 
ers ; and imploring vengeance for the murder of his 
fon, accufed Mary as an accomplice with Bothwel in 
that enormity ^ 

When this charge was fo unexpededly given in, 
and copies of it were tranfmitted to the bifhop of 
Rofs, lord Herries, and the other commillioiiers of 
Mary, they abfolutely refufed to return an anfwer ; 
and they grounded their filence on very extraordinary 
reafons : They had orders, they faid, from their 
miflrefs, if any thing were advanced that might 
touch her honour, not. to make any defence, as llie 
was a fovereign princefs, and could not be fubjed: to 
' any tribunal j and they required that fhe fhould 
previoufly be admitted to Elizabeth's prefence, to 
whom, and to whom alone, fhe was determined to 
juflify her innocence \ They forgot that the con- 
ferences were at firfl begun, and were flill conti- 
nued, with no other view than to clear her from the 
accufations of her enemies ; that Elizabeth had ever 
pretended to enter into them only as her friend, by 
her own confent and approbation, not as alTumlng 

b Goodall, vol. ii. p. 199. * Anderfon, vol. iv. part 2. p. 115. 
& feq. Goodall, vol. ii. p. 206. ■* Anderlon, vol. iv. part a. 

p. 123. Goodall, vol, ii. p. 208. « Anderlon, vol. iv. part 2. 

p. 125. Si leq, Goodallj vol. ii. p. 184. sji. 217, 

any 



ELIZABETH. Hli 

tiny jurifdidion over her ; that this prlncefs had, chap. 
from the beginning, refufed to admit her to her pre- xxxix. 
fence, till Ihe fliould vindicate herfelf from the j^^g, 
crimes imputed to her ; that flie had therefore dif- 
covered no new figns of partiality by her perfe- 
verance in that refolution ; and that though flie had 
granted an audience to the earl of Murray and his 
colleagues, fhe had previoufly conferred the fame 
honour on Mary's commiffioners ^ ; and her con- 
dudl was fo far entirely equal to both parties ^. 

As the commiffioners of the queen of Scots re- 
fufed to give in any anfwer to Murray's charge, the 
neceflary confequence feemed to be, that there could 
be no further proceedings in the conference. But 
though this filence might be interpreted as a pre- 
fumption againft her, it did not fully anfwer the 
purpofe of thofe Englifh minifters who were ene- 
mies to that princefs. They (till defired to have in 
their hands the proofs of her guilt ; and in order 
to draw them with decency from the regent, a ju- 
dicious artifice was employed by Elizabeth. Murray 
was called before the Englifh commiffioners ; and 
reproved by them, in the queen's name, for the 
atrocious imputations which he had the temerity 
to throw upon liis fovereign : But though the earl 
of Murray, they added, and the other commiffion- 
ers, had fo far forgotten the duty of allegiance to 
their prince, the queen never would overlook what 
flie owed to her friend, her neighbour, and her kinf- 
woman ; and fhe therefore defired to know what 
they could fay in their own juflification ^. Murray, 
thus urged, made no difficulty in producing the 
proofs of his charge againfl the queen of Scots ; 
and among the reft, fome love-letters and fonnets 
of her's to Bothwel, written all in her own hand, 

f Lefley's Negociations in Anderfon, vol. iii. p. 25. Haynes,p. 487. 
S See note [K] at the end of the volume. ^ Anderlbn, vol. iv. 
part 2. p. 147. Goodall, voJ. ii, p. 233, 

1 1 and 



142 HISTORY OF ENGLAN]^. 

CHAP, and two other papers, one written in her owii 
J^^^^' hand, another fubfcribed by her, and written by 
,^68. the earl of Huntley ; each of which contained a 
promife of marriage with Bothwel, made before 
the pretended trial and acquittal of that noble- 
man. 

All thefe important papers had been kept by 
BothM el in a filver box or calket, which had been 
given him by Mary, and which had belonged to 
her firfl hufband, Francis j and though the princefs 
had enjoined him to burn the letters as foon as he 
had read them, he had thought proper carefully 
to prefe>-ve them as pledges of her fidelity, and 
had committed them to the cuftody of fir James 
Balfour, deputy-governor of the caftle of Edin- 
burgh. "When that fortrefs was befieged by the 
affocialed lords, Bothwel fent a fervant to receive 
the cafket fi jm the hands of the deputy-governor. 
Balfour delivered it to the meffenger ; but as he had 
at that time received feme difgufh from Bothwel, 
and was fecretly negotiating an agreement with the 
ruling party, he took care, by conveying private 
intelligence to the earl of Morton, to make the 
papers be intercepted by him. They contained in- 
conteftible proofs of Mary's criminal correfpond^ 
ence with Bothwel, of her confent to the king's 
murder, and of her concurrence in the violence 
which Bothwel pretended to commit upon her', 
Murray fortified this evidence by fome teflimonies 
of correfpondent fads ^ ; and he added, fome time 
after, the dying confefiion of one Hubert, or French 
Paris, as he was called, a fervant of Bothwel's, 
who had been executed for the king's murder, 
and who direftly charged the queen with her be-* 
ing acceffary to that criminal enterprife \ 

i Andeifon, vol. ii. p. 115. Goodall, vol. ii. p. i. 

^ Anderlon, vol. ii. part a. p. 165, &c. Goodall, vol* ii. p. 243. 

J Amlerfon, tjoI. ii. p. 192. Goodall, vol. ii. p. 76. 

Mary'ts 



ELIZABETH. 143 

Mary's commiflioners had ufed every expe- chap. 
dient to ward this blow which they Taw coming -^'-^^J^ 
upon them, and againfl which, it appears, they were j^(;s, 
not provided with any proper defence. As loon as 
Murray opened his charge, they endeavoured to 
turn the conference from an inquiry into a nego- 
tiation ; and though informed by the Englifli com- 
miflioners that nothing could be more diflionourable 
for their miflrefs, than to enter into a treaty with 
fuch undutiful fubjedls, before llie had jufrified her- 
felf from thofe enormous imputations which had been 
thrown upon her, they ftiji infifted that Elizabeth 
Ihould fettle terms of accommodation betu'een Mary 
and her enemies in Scotland "". They maintained 
that, till their miflrefs had given in her anfwer to 
Murray's charge, his proofs could neither be called 
for nor produced " : And findino: that the Enc;Iiili 
commiflioners were uili determined to proceed in 
the method which had been projected, thev finally 
broke off the conferences, and never would make 
any reply. Thefe papers, at leaft tranfiations of 
them, have fmce been publiflied. The objetlions 
made to their authenticity are, in general, of fmall 
force : But were they ever fo fpecious, they cannot 
now be hearkened to ; fmce Mary, at the time 
when the truth could have been fully cleared, did, 
in eifefl, ratify the evidence againft her, by re- 
coiling from the inquiry at the very critical moment, 
and refufmg to give an anfwer to the accufation of 
her enemies °. 

But Elizabeth, though fhe had feen enough for 
her own fatisfadlion, w^as determined that the mofc 
eminent perfons of her court fhould alfo be ac- 
quainted with thefe tranfaclions, and fliould be con- 
vinced of the equity of her proceedings. She or- 
dered her privy-councii to be aflTembled ; and, that 

^ Anderfon, vol. iv. part 2. p. 135. 139. GooHall. vol. ii. p. 214. 
» Anderfon, vol. iv. part 2. p. 139. 145. Goodall, vol. ii. p. 228. 
» Ste note [L] at the end of the volume. 

Hie 



144 lilSTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, /lie might render the matter more folemn and au« 
^^^^^ thentic, Ihe fummoned, along with them, the earls 
1568. ^^ Northumberland, Weftmoreland, Shrewfbury, 
Worcefter, Huntingdon, and Warwic. All the 
proceedings of the Englifh commiffioners were 
read to them : The evidences produced by Murray 
were perufed : A great number of letters written 
by Mary to Elizabeth were laid before them, and 
the hand-writing compared with that of the letters 
delivered in by the regent : The refufal of the queen 
of Scots' commiffioners to make any reply, was 
related : And on the whole, Elizabeth told them, 
that as fhe had from the firll thought it improper 
that Mary,' after fuch horrid crimes were imputed 
to her, fliould be admitted to her prefence before fhe 
had, in fome meafure, juftified herfelf from the 
charge ; fo now, when her guilt was confirmed by 
fo many evidences, and all anfwer refufed, fhe muff, 
lor her part, perfevere more lleadily in that re- 
jTolutionP. Elizabeth next called in the queen of 
Scots* commiffioners, and, after obferving that fhe 
deemed it much more decent for their miflrefs to 
continue the conferences, than to require the li- 
berty of juftifying herfelf in perfon, fhe told them, 
that Mary might either fend her reply by a perfon 
whom fhe trufled, or deliver it herfelf to fome 
Englifli nobleman, whom Elizabeth ffiould appoint 
to wait upon her : But as to her refolution of making 
no reply at all, fhe mud regard it as the flrongeft con- 
feffion of guilt ; nor could they ever be deemed her 
friends who advifed her to that method of proceed- 
ing ''. Thefe topics fhe enforced (till more flrongly 
in a letter which flie wrote to Mary herfelf'. 

The queen of Scots had no other fubterfuge from 
thefe preffing remonflrances, than flill to demand 
a perfonal interview v/ith Elizabeth : A conceffion 

P Anderfon, vol. iv. part 2. p. 170, &c. Goodall, vol. ii. p. 254» 
1 AndeTlon, vol. iv. part 2. p. 179, &c. Goodall, vol. ii. p. 268. 
» Anderfon, vol. iv. part z, p. 183. Goedall, vol. ii. p. 169. 

which 



ELIZABETH. 14^ 

vvhlch^ fhe was fenfible, would never be granted « ;• C H A P. 
becaufe Elizabeth knew that this expedient could s^^„.^^.^Jj 
decide nothing; becaufe it brought matters to ex- 156a. 
tremity which that princefs defired to avoid ; and 
becaufe it had been refufed from the beginning, even 
before the commencement of the conferences. In 
order to keep herfelf better in countenance, Mary 
thought of another device. Though the conferences 
were broken off, fhe ordered her commiilioners- to 
accufe the earl of Murray and his affociates as the 
murderers of the king ' : But this accufation, coming 
fo late, being extorted merely by a complaint of Mur- 
ray's, and being unfupported by any proof, could 
only be regarded as an angry recrimination upon her 
enemy ". She alfo defired to have copies of the pa- 
p^rrs given in by the regent ; but as file ftill perfifted 
in her refolution to make no reply before the Englifli 
commiHioners, this demand was finally refufed her '^. 
As Mary had thus put an end to the conferences, 
the regent expreffed great impatience to return into 
Scotland ; and he complained, that his enemies had 
taken advantage of his abfence, and had thrown the 
whole government into confufion. Elizabeth there- 
fore difmiffed him ; and granted him a loan of five 
thoufand pounds to bear the charges of his journey ". 
During the conferences at York, the duke of Cha- 
telrault arrived at London, in paffing from France ; 
and as the queen knew that he was engaged in Mary's 
party, and had very plaufible pretenfions to the re- 
gency of the king of Scots, flie thought proper to 
detain him till after Murray's departure. Buf not- 
withftanding thefe marks of favour, and fome other 
afTiftancewhichifie fecretly gave this latter nobleman^, 

5 Cabala, p. 157. ' Goodall, vol. ii. p. 2S0. 

" See note [M] at the end of tlie volume. ^ Goodall, vol. ii. 

p. 253. 7.S3. 2?g. 310, 311, Hnynes, vcl. i. p. 491. S e note [Nj 
at tiie end of the volume, * Rvnier. torn. xv. p. 677. 

K MS. ill the Advocat'js' library^ A. 3. ag. p. liS, 129, 130. ftoni 
■Coir Lib. Cni. c. 1. 

Vol. V. L ihe 



146 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 



CHAP. 

XXXIX. 



fhe flill declined acknowledging the young king, of 
treating with Murray as tegent of Scotland. 
1368. Orders were given for removing the queen of 

Scots from Bolton, a place furrounded with catholics, 
to Tutbury in the county of Stafford, where (lie was 
put under the cuftody of the earl of Shrewibury. 
Elizabeth entertained hopes that this princefs, dif- 
couraged by her misfortunes, and confounded by the 
late tranfatlions, would be glad to fecure a fafe re- 
treat from all the tempefts with which fhe had been 
agitated ; and (lie promifed to bury every thing in 
oblivion, provided Mary would agree, either volun- 
tarily to refign her crown, or to affociate her fon with 
her in the government ; and the adminiflration to 
remain, during his minority, in the hands of the earl 
of Murray ^. But that high-fpirited princefs refufed 
all treaty upon fuch terms, and declared that her laft 
words fliould be thofe of a queen of Scotland. Be- 
fides many other reafons, fhe faid, which fixed her 
in that refolution, flie knev/, that if, in the prefent 
emergence, £he made fuch conceffions, her fubmit 
fion would be univerfaliy deemed an acknowledg- 
ment of guilt, and would ratify all the calumnies of 
her enemies ^ 

Mary flill infifled upon this alternative ; either 
that Elizabeth fhould afTift her in recovering her 
authority, or fhould give her liberty to retire into 
France, and make trial of the friendfhip of other 
princes : And as fhe afferted that (he had come vo- 
luntarily into' England, invired by many former pro- 
felTions of amity, fhe thought that one or other of 
thefe requefls could not, without the mofl extreme 
injuftice, be refufed her. But Elizabeth, fenfible of 
the danger which attended both thefe propofals, was 
fecretly refolved to detain her flill a captive ; and as 
her retreat into England had been little voluntary, 
her claim upon the queen's generofity appeared much 
lefs urgent than fhe was willing to pretend. NecefTity, 

» Goodall, Yol.ii, p. »95. ' Ibid. p. ^01. 

It 



ELIZABETH. 147 

It was thought, would, to the prudent, juitify her ^ h ^ P. 
detention: Her paft miiconducl would apologize for v^.^,,--ly 
it to the equitable : And though it was forefeen, that 1568. 
companion for Mary's fituation. Joined to l:er in- 
trigues and infmuating behaviour, would, while foe 
remained in England, excite the zeal of her friends, 
efpecially of the catholics, thefe inconveniencies were 
deemed much inferior to thofe which attended any 
other ex|)edient. Elizabeth trufted alfo to her own 
addrcfs for eluding all thefe difliculties : She purpofed 
to avoid breaking abfolutely with the queen of Scots, 
to keep her always in hopes of an accommodation, 
to negotiate perpetually with her, and ftill to throw 
the blame of not coming to any conclufion, either 
on unforefeen accidents, or on the obflinacy and 
perverfenefs of others. 

We come now to mention fome Englifh affairs 
which we left behind us, that Vv^e might not interrupt 
our narrative of the events in Scotland, which form 
fo material a part of the prefent reign. The term 
fixed by the treaty of Cateau-Cambrefis for the re- 
ftitution of Calais, expired in 1567; and Elizabeth, 
after making her demand at the gates of chat city, 
fent fir Thomas Smith to Paris ; and that minifter, 
in conjunftion with fir Henry Norris, her refident 
ambaifador, enforced her pretenfions. Conferences 
were held on that head, without coming to any con- 
clufion fatisfaftory to the Englifh. The chancellor, 
De I'Hofpital, told the Englifh ambaffadors, that 
though France, by an article of the treaty, was 
obliged to reflore Calais on the expiration of eight 
years, there w^as another article of the fame treaty, 
which now deprived Elizabeth of any right that could 
accrue to her by that engagement: That it was agreed, 
if the Englifh fhould, during the interval, commit 
hoflilities upon France, they fhould inftantly forfeit all 
claim to Calais; and the taking poffeffion of Havre and 
Dieppe, with whatever pretences that meafure might 
be covered, was a plain violation of the peace betv/een 

L 2 the 



148 HISTORY OF ENGLAND, 

CHAP, the nations : That thouo^h thefe places were not en- 

XXXIX . • 

y,^^..,^^ tered by force, but put into Elizabeth's hands by the 
jj68. governors, thefe governors were rebels ; and a cor- 
refpondence with fuch traitors was the mod flagrant 
injury that could be committed on any fovereign : 
That in the treaty which enfued upon the expulfion 
of the Englifli from Normandy, the French- mini- 
flers had abfolutely refufed to make any mention of 
Calais, and had thereby declared their intention to 
take advantage of the title which had accrued to the 
crown of France : And that though a general claufe 
had been infer ted, implying a refer vation of all claims, 
this conceffion could not avail the Englifh, who at 
that time poflefled no jufl claim to Calais, and had 
previoufly forfeited all right to that fortrefs ''. The 
queen was nowife furprifed at hearing thefe allega- 
tions ; and as fhe knew that the French court in- 
tended not from the firft to make reftitution, much 
lefs after they could juflify their refufal by fuch plau- 
fible reafons, fhe thought it better for the prefent to 
acquiefce in the lofs, than to purfue a doubtful title 
by a war both dangerous and expenfive, as well as 
unfeafonable ^ 

Elizabeth entered anew into negotiations for 
efpoufmg the archduke Charles ; and fhe feems, at 
this time, to have had no great motive of policy, 
which might induce her to make this fallacious offer: 
But as file was very rigorous in the terms infifled on, 
and would not agree that the archduke, if he efpoufed 
her, fiiould enjoy any power or title in England, and 
even refufed him the exercife of his religion, the 
treaty came to nothing ; and that prince, defpairing 
of fuccefs in his addreflts, married the daughter of 
^ Albert duke of Bavaria ''. 

^ Haynes, p. 587, = Camden, p. 40$. '^ Ibid. 407, 40S, 



ELIZABETH, 



14^ 



CHAP. XL. 



CharaBer of the puritans Duke of Norfolk'* s con- 

f piracy InfurrsHion in the North yf/j/^^- 

nation of the earl of Murray A parliament 

Civil zvars of France Affairs of the Low Coun- 
tries New confpiracy of the duke of Norfolk 

• Trial of Norfolk' ■ His execution Scotch 

affairs French affairs Ma/facre of Paris 

French affairs Civil wars of the Low 

Countries A parliament. 



&» 



o 



F all the European churches which fhook off ^ ^^ ^ P- 



XL. 



the yoke of papal authority, no one proceeded _ 
with fo much reafon and moderation as the church js^^. 
of England ; an advantage which had been derived Cha.aaer 
partly from the interpofition of the civil magiftrate °^ ^'^^ P^" 
in this innovation, partly from the gradual and flow 
Iteps by which the reformation was conducted in that 
kingdom. Rage and animofity againft the catholic 
religion was as little indulged as could be fuppofed 
in fuch a revolution : The fabric of the fecular hier- 
archy was maintained entire : The ancient liturgy 
ivas preferved, fo far as was thought confident with 
the new principles : Many ceremonies, become ve- 
nerable from age and preceding ufe, were retained : 
The fplendour of the Romifh worfhip, though re- 
moved, had at leail given place to order and de- 
cency : The diftindive habits of the clergy, ac- 
cording to their different ranks, were continued : 
No innovation was admitted, merely from fpite 

L ^- an4 



15© HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, and oppofirion to former ufage : And the new re- 
v.^^^ ligioD, by mitigating the genius of the ancient fuper- 
15.3. flition, and rendering it more compatible with the 
peace and interefts of fociety, had prefer ved itfelf in 
that happy medium which wife men have always 
fought, and which the people have fo feldom been 
able to maintain. 

But though fuch, in general, was the fpirit of the 
reformation in that country, many of the Engliih 
reformers, being men of more warm complexions 
and more obftinate tempers, endeavoured to pulh 
matters to extremities againft the church of Rome, 
and indulged themfelves in the mofl violent contra- 
riety and antipathy to all form.er praftices. Among 
thefe, Hooper, who afterwards luft'ered for his re- 
lioion with fuch extraordinary conftancy, was chiefly 
dillinguilhed. This man was appointed, during the 
reign of Edward, to the fee of Glocefler, and made 
no fcruple of accepting the epifcopal office ; but he 
refufed to be confecrated in the epifcopal habit, the 
cymarre and rochette, which had formerly, he 
faid, been abufed by fuper flition, and which were 
thereby rendered unbecoming a true chriftian. Cran- 
mer and Ridley were furprifed at this objedion, vidiich 
oppofed the received practice, and even the efta- 
blifhed laws; and though young Edward, defirous of 
promoting a man fo celebrated for his eloquence, his 
Ileal, and his morals, enjoined them to difpenfe with 
this ceremony, they were ftill determined to retain 
it. Hooper then em.braced the refolutipn, rather to 
refufe the bifhopric than clothe himfelf in thofe hated 
garments ; but it was deemed requifite, that, for the 
lake of the example, he fliould not efcape fo eafily. 
He was firft confined to Cranmer's houfe, then thrown 
into prifon till he fliould confent to be a bifliop on 
the terms propofed : He was plied with conferences, 
and reprimands, and arguments : Bucer and Peter 
Jidartyr, and the mod: celebrated foreign reformers, 

were 



ELIZABETH. 151 

were confulted on this important queftion : And a ^ hap. 
compromife, with great difficulty, was at lall made, v.^„-^-!^^ 
that Hooper fliould not be obliged to wear com- ,^68. 
monly the obnoxious robes, but ihould agree to be 
confecrated in them, and to ule them during cathe- 
dral fervice ■■' : A condcfcenfion not a little extra- 
ordinary in a man of fo inflexible a fpirit as this 
reformer. 

The fame objeftion which had arifen with regard 
to the epifcopal habit, had been moved againft the 
raiment of the inferior clergy ; and the furplice, in 
particular, with the tippet and corner cap, was a great 
obje6: of abhorrence to many of the popular zealots ^ 
in vain was it urged that particular habits, as well as 
poftures and ceremonies, having been conftantly 
ufed by the clergy, and employed in religious fer- 
vice, acquire a veneration in the eyes of the people, 
appear facred in their apprehenfions, excite their de- 
votion, and contract a kind of myflerious virtue, 
which attaches the affedions of men to the national 
and eftablifhed worfhip : That in order to produce 
this effeft, an uniformity in thefe particulars is re- 
quifite, and even a perfeverance, as far as poflible, 
in the former practice : And that the nation would 
be happy, if, by retaining thefe inoffenfive ob- 
fervances, the reformers could engage the people to 
renounce willingly what was abfurd or pernicious in 
the ancient fuperftition. Thefe arguments, which 
had influence with wife men, were the very reafons 
wdrich engaged the violent proteftants to rejefl the 
habits. They puflred matters to a total oppofition 
with the church of Rome : Every compliance, they 
faid, was a fymbolifmg with Antichrif^^. And this 
fpirit was carried fo far by fome reformesfi, that, in a 
national remonftrance made afterwards by the church 
of Scotland againft thefe habits, it was afked, " What 

« Burnet, vol.ii. p. 152. Heylirij p. 90. ^ Stryp«, vol.:. 

p. 416, g Ibid. p. 4.16. 

L 4 "has 




HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

has Chrift Jefus to do with Belial ? What has 

darknefs to do with light ? If furplices, comer 
jj68. *' caps, and tippets have been badges of idolaters 
" in the very aft of their idolatry ; why {hould the 
" preacher of Chriftian liberty, and the open re- 
" buker of all fuperftition, partake with the dregs 
" of the Romifli beaft ? Yea, who is there that 
" ought not rather to be afraid of taking in his hand, 
*' or on his forehead, the print and mark of that 
" odious beaft ^T* But this application was rejeded 
by the Enghfli church. 

There was only one inftance in which the fpirit 
of contradiction to the Romanifts took place uni- 
verfally in England : The altar was removed from 
the wall, was placed in the middle of the church, 
and was thenceforth denominated the communion- 
table. The reafon why this innovation met with 
fuch general reception was, that the nobility and 
gentry got thereby a pretence for making fpoil of 
the plate, veftures, and rich ornaments which be- 
longed to the altars ^. 

These difputes, which had been ftarted during 
the reign of Edward, were carried abroad by the 
proteftants, who fled from the perfecutions of Mary; 
jmd as the zeal of thefe men had received an increafe 
from the furious cruelty of their enemies, they were 
generally inclined to carry their oppofition to the 
utmoft extremity agalnft the practices of the church 
of Rome. Their communication with Calvin and 
the other reformers, who followed the difcipline and 
worfhip of Geneva, confirmed them in this obftinate 
reluclance ; and though fome of the refugees, par- 
ticularly thofe who were eftablifhed at Frankfort, 
ftill adhered to king Edward's liturgy, the prevail- 
ing fpirit carried thefe confcflbrs to feek a ftill farther 
reformation. On the acceffion of Elizabeth, they 

f Kei'li, p. 56^. K'lox, p. 402. 

£ Hpyi>i), preface; p, 3. Hilt, p, io<5. 

returne4 



ELIZABETH. 



'53 



returned to their native country ; and being regarded ^ ^\ ^ J*« 
with general veneration, on account of their zeal and v^,^.^^.^ 
pafl fufFerings, they ventured to infifl on the efta- 1568. 
blifhment of their projeded model ; nor did they 
want countenance from many confiderable perfons in 
the queen's council. But the princefs herfelf, fo far 
from being willing to defpoil religion of the few or- 
naments and ceremonies which remained in it, was 
rather inclined to bring the public woriliip ftill nearer 
to the Romifh ritual ^ ; and fhe thought that the 
reformation had already gone too far in fhaking off 
thefe forms and obfervances, which, without diftraQ:- 
ing men of more refined apprehenfions, tend, in a 
very innocent manner, to allure, and amufe, and 
engage the vulgar. She took care to have a law for 
uniformity ftriclly enacted : She was empowered by 
the parliament to add any new ceremonies which 
fhe thought proper ; and though fhe was fparing in 
. the exercife of this prerogative, fhe continued rigid 
in exacting an obfervance of the eftablifhed laws, 
^rid in punifhing all nonconformity. The zealots, 
therefore, who harboured a great antipathy to the 
epifcopal order, and to the whole 4iturgy, were 
obliged, in a great meafure, to conceal thefe fenti- 
ments, which would have been regarded as highly 
audacious and criminal ; and they confined their 
avowed objections to the furplice, the confirmation 

^ When Ncnvel, ene of her chaplains, had fpoken hfs reverently in a fcrm*n, 
preached before her, of the fign of the. crof, fhe called aloud to him from her clofet 
ivindcw, com7nar.ding him to retire fram that ungodly digrefjion, and to return unto 
his text And on he ether fide, ivhen one of her di-vines bad preached a fermgn 
in defence of the real prefence, fhe openly gave him thar.ks for his pains and pieiy, 
•— Heylin, p. 124. She would have abfolutely forbidden the marriage 
of the clergy, if Cecil liad not interpoled. 6ti ype's Life of Parker, 
p. 107, 108, 109. She was an enemy to feimons, and ufually faid, 
that Ihe thought two or three preachers were fufficient for a whole 
county. It was probably for thefe reafons that one Doring told her 
to her face from the pulpit, that fhe was iike an untamed heifer, that 
would not be ruled by God's people, but obftiuifed his difcipline. 
See life of Hooker, prefixed to his wpjks, 

of 




154 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

of children, the fign of the crofs in baptifm, the 
ring in marriage, kneehng at the facrament, and 
ij68. bowing at the name of Jefus. So fruitlefs is it 
for fovereigns to watch with a rigid care over ortho- 
doxy, and to employ the fword in religious contro- 
verfy, that the work, perpetually renewed, is perpe- 
tually to begin ; and a garb, a gefture, nay a me- 
taphyseal or grammatical diitinftion, when rendered 
important by the difputes of theologians, and the 
zeal of the magiflrate, is fufficient to deftroy the 
unity of the church, and even the peace of fociety. 
Thefe controverfies had already excited fuch fer- 
ment among the people, that in fome places they 
refufed to frequent the churches where the habits 
and ceremonies were ufed ; would not falute the 
conforming clergy; and proceeded fo far as to re- 
vile them in the ftreets, to fpit in their faces, and to 
ufe them Vvich all manner of contumely *. And 
while the fovereign authority checked thefe excefles, 
the iiame was confined, not extinguifiied ; and burn- 
ing fiercer from confinement, it burfl out in the 
fucceedinsT reiens to the deftruclion of the church 

O O 

and monarchy. 

All enthufiafts, indulging themfelves in rap- 
turous flights, ecftafies, vifions, infpirations, have a 
natural averfion to epifcopal authority, to ceremo- 
nies, rites, and forms, which they denominate fu- 
perftition, or beggarly elements, and which feem to 
I red rain the liberal effufions of their zeal and devo- 

tion : But there was another fet of opinions adopted 
by thefe innovators, which rendered them in a pe- 
culiar manner the object of Elizabeth's aveifion. 
The fame bold and daring fpirit, which accom- 
panied them in their addreifes to the divinity, ap- 
peared in their political fpeculations ; and the prin- 
dples of civil liberty, which, during fome reigns, had 

' Strype's Life of Whitgift, p. 460. 

been 



E L I Z A B E T H. 155 

been little avowed in the nation, and which were C ha p. 
totally incompatible with the prefent exorbitant k^^,,,,.^^.^^ 
prerogative, had been flrongly adopted by this new 1568. 
feci:. Scarcely any Ibvereign before Elizabeth, and 
none after her, carried higher, both in Ipeculation 
and praftice, the authority of the crown ; and the 
puritans (fo thefe feftaries were called, on account 
of their pretending to a fuperior purity of worfhip 
and difcipline) could not recommend themfelves 
worfe to her favour, than by inculcating the doc- 
trine of refilling or reflraining princes. From all 
thefe motives, the queen neglefted no opportunity 
of depreffing thofe zealous innovators; and while 
they were fecretly countenanced by fome of her moft 
favoured minifters, Cecil, Leicelter, Knolles, Bed- 
ford, Walfmgham, fhe never was, to the end of her 
life, reconciled to their principles and practices. 

We have thought proper to infert in this place 
an account of the rife and genius of the puritans ; 
becauie Camden marks the prefent year, as the pe- 
riod when they began, to make themfelves confider- 
able in England. We now return to our narra- 
tion. 

The duke of Norfolk was the only peer that ijfip. 
enjoyed the higheft tide of nobihty ; and as there H"'^-^?^ 
were at prefent no princes of the blood, the fplendour confpiracy. 
of his family, the opulence of his fortune, and the 
extent of his influence, had rendered him without 
comparifon the firfl fubjeft in England. The qua- 
lities of his mind corresponded to his high ftation : 
Beneficent, affable, generous, he had acquired the 
affeftions of the people ; prudent, moderate, ob- 
fequious, he poffefTed, without giving her any 
jealoufy, the good graces of his fovereign. His 
grandfather and father had long been regarded as the 
leaders of the catholics ; and this hereditary attach- 
ment, joined to the alliance of blood, had procured 
him the friendlhip of the moft confiderable men of 

1 4. that 



156 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

c H A P. that party : But as he had been educated among 
^^^^1. the reformers, was fmcerely devoted to their prin- 
,^69. ciples, and mamtamed that flrift decorum and re- 
gularity of hfe, by which the proteftants were at 
that time diilinguillied ; he thereby enjoyed the rare 
felicity of being popular even with the mod op- 
pofite faftions. The height of his profperity alone 
was the fource of his misfortunes, and engaged 
him in attempts, from which his virtue and pru- 
dence would naturally have for ever kept him at a 
diftance. 

Norfolk was at this time a widower ; and be* 
ing of a fuitable age, his marriage with the queen 
of Scots had appeared fo natural, that it had oc- 
curred to feveral of his friends and thofe of that 
princefs : But the firft perfon, who, after fecretary 
Lidington, opened the fcheme to the duke, is faid 
to have been the earl of Murray, before his de- 
parture for Scotland ^. That nc-bleman fet before 
Norfolk both the advantage of compofing the dif- 
fenfions in Scotland by an alliance, which would 
be fo generally acceptable, and the profped of 
reaping the fucceffion of England ; and in order to 
bind Norfolk's intereft the fader with Mary's, he 
propofed that the duke's daughter fhould alfo 
efpoufe the young king of Scotland. The previ- 
ouily obtaining of Elizabeth's confent, was regarded, 
both by Murray and Norfolk, as a circumftance 
eflential to the fuccefs of their projed; and all terms 
being adjuded between them, Murray took care, 
by means of fir Robert Melvil, to have the defign 
communicated to the queen of Scots. This prin- 
cefs replied, that the vexations which die had met 
with in her two lad marriages, had made her more 
inclined to lead a fmgle life ; but flie was deter- 
mined to facrifice her own inclinations to the public 

k Lefley, ^, 36; 37. 

■v^^elfare ; 



I 



ELIZABETH. 157 

welfare i And therefore, as foon as fhe fhould be ^ ^^ **• 
legally divorced from Bothwel, Ihe would be deter- t^^,^...,^^^ 
mined by the opinion of her nobility and people in 1^69. 
the choice of another hufband '. 

It is probable that Murray was not fmcere in 
this propofal. He had two motives to engage him 
to diilimulation. He knew the danger which he 
muft run in his return through the North of Eng- 
land, from the power of the earls of Northumber^ 
land and Weftmoreland, Mary's partifans in that 
country ; and he dreaded an infurreftion in Scot- 
land from the duke of Chatelrault, and the earls of 
Argyle and Huntley, whom {he had appointed her 
lieutenants during her abfence. By thefe feigned 
appearances of friendfhip, he both engaged Norfolk 
to write in his favour to the northern noblemen "" 5 
and he perfuaded the queen of Scots to give her lieu- 
tenants permifTion, and even advice, to conclude a 
cefTation of hoflilities with the regent's party ". 

Thii duke of Norfolk, though he had agreed 
that Elizabeth's confent fhould be previoufly ob- 
tained before the completion of his marriage, had 
reafon to apprehend that he never Ihould prevail 
with her voluntarily to make that conceffion. He 
knew her perpetual and unrelenting jealoufy againft 
her heir knd rival ; he was acquainted with her for- 
mer reludance to all propofals of marriage with the 
queen of Scots ; he forefaw that this princefs's 
efpoufnig a perfon of his power and charafter and 
intereft, would give the greatefl umbrage ; and as 
it would then become neceflhry to reinftate her ia 
pofTeffion of her throne on fome tolerable terms, 
and even to endeavour the re-eftablifhing of her 
charafter, he dreaded left Elizabeth, whofe politics 
had now taken a different turn, would never agree 
'to fuch indulgent and generous conditions. He 
therefore attempted previoufly to gain the confent 

' Lefley, p. 4.0, 41, ™ State Trials, p, 76, 78^, 

^ Lefley, p. 41 # 

and 



158 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP. 3j^(j approbation of feveral of the m oft confiderable 
^^^^^..^^J^^ nobility ; and he was fucceisful with the earls of 
1569. Pembroke, Arundel, Derby, Bedford, Shrewfbury, 
Southampton, Northumberland, Weftmoreland, 
Sulfex °. Lord Lumley and Sir Nicholas Throg- 
morton cordially embraced the propofal : Even the 
earl of Leicefter, Elizabeth's declared favourite, 
who had formerly entertained fome views of efpouf- 
ing Mary, Vvillingly refigned all his pretenfions, and 
feemed to enter zealoufly into Norfolk's interefts •*. 
There were other motives, befides affection to the 
duke, M-hich produced this general combination of 
the nobility. 

Sir William Cecil, fecretary of ftate, was the 
moft vigilant, aftive, and prudent minifter ever 
known in England ; and as he was governed by 
no views but the interefts of his fovereign, which he 
had inflexibly purfued, his authority over her be- 
came every day more predominant. Ever cool him- 
felf, and uninfluenced by prejudice or affeftion, he 
checked thofe fallies of pailion, and fometimes of 
caprice, to which Ihe was fubje6l ; and if he failed 
of perfuading her in the firft movement, his perfe- 
verance, and remonftrances, and arguments, were 
fure at laft to recommend themfelves to her found 
difcernment. The more credit he gained with his 
miftrefs, the more was he expofed to the envy of 
her other counfellors ; and as he had been fuppofed 
to adopt the interefts of the houfe of Suftblk, whofe 
claim feemed to carry with it no danger to the pre- 
fent eftablifliment, his enemies, in oppofition to him, 
were naturally led to attach themfelves to the queen 
of Scots. Elizabeth faw, without uneafmefs, this 
emulation among her courtiers, which ferved to 
augment her own authority : And though ftie fup- 
ported Cecil, whenever matters came to extremities, 
and diflipated every confpiracy againft him, parti- 

*» Lefley, p. 55. Camilen, p' 4^9- Spotfwood; p.ajo. 
» Haynes, p.535. ^ 

cularly 



ELIZABETH. 1,-9 

cularly one laid about this time for having him chap. 
thrown into the Tower on fome pretence or -^^^^^ 
other % file never gave him luch unlimited confi- 1^69 
dence as might enable him entirely to crufli his 
adverfarics. 

Norfolk, fenf.ble of the difiicuky which he 
mull meet with in cont^-olling Cecil's counfels, 
efpecially where they concurred with the inclination 
as well as interefl of the queen, durft not open to 
her his intentions of marrying the queen of Scots ; 
but proceeded Hill in the fame courle, of increafmg 
his intereft in the kingdom, and engaging more of 
the nobility to take part in his meafures. A letter 
was written to Mary by Leicefter, and figned by 
feveral of the firft rank, recommending Norfolk 
for her huiliand, and ftipulating conditions for the 
advantage of both kingdoms ; particularly, that flie 
(hould give fufficient furety to Elizabeth, and the 
heirs of her body, for the free enjoyment of the 
crown of England ; that a perpetual league, oftenfive 
and defenfive, Ihould be made between their realms 
and fubjefts ; that the proteftant religion fliould be 
eltabhflied by law in Scotland ; and that fhe fliould 
grant an amnefly to her rebels in that kingdom \ 
When Mary returned a favourable anfwer to this 
application, Norfolk employed himfelf with new 
ardour in the execution of his projecl j and befides 
fecuring the interefts of many of the confiderable 
gentry and nobility who refided at court, he wrote 
letters to fuch as lived at their country-feats, and 
polfelfed the greateft authority in the feveral coun- 
ties '. The kings of France and Spain, who in- 
terefted themfelves extremely in Mary's caufe, v\^ere 
fecretly confulted, and expreffed their approbation 
of thefe meafures ^ And though Ehzabeth's con- 
fent was always fuppofed as a previous condition to 

9 Camden, p. 4.17. >■ Lefley, p. 50, Camden, p,4.20. 

Hayncs, p. 535. J39. s Lefley, p, 62. t Ibid. p. 63. 

the 



i6'o ' HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 



CHAP. 

XL. 



the finiflilng of this alliance, it was apparently Nor- 
folk's intention, when he proceeded fuch lengths 
XJ69. without confultig her, to render his party fo ftrong, 
that it {hould no longer be in her power to refufe 
it". 

It was impolTible that fo extenfive a confpiracy 
could entirely efcape the queen's vigilance and that 
of Cecil. She dropped feveral intimations to the 
duke, by which he might learn that fhe was 
acquainted with his defigns ; and Ihe frequently 
w^arned him to beware on what pillow he repofed 
his head ''' : But he never had the prudence or 
the courage to open to her his full intentions^ 
Certain intelligence of this dangerous combination 
was given her firfl by Leicefter, then by Murray ", 
who, if ever he was fmcere in promoting Norfolk's 
marriage, which is much to be doubted, had at leafl: 
intended, for his own fafety, and that of his party, 
that Elizabeth Hiould, in reality, as well as in ap* 
pearance, be entire arbiter of the conditions, and 
fliould not have her confent extorted by any con- 
federacy of her own fubjefts. This information gave 
great alarm to the court of England; and the more 
fo, as thofe intrigues were attended with other cir- 
cumftances, of which, it is probable, Elizabeth was 
not wholly ignorant. 

Among the nobility and gentry ,that feemed to 
enter into Norfolk's views, there were many, who 
were zealoully attached to the catholic religion, who 
had no other defign than that of reftoring Mary to 
her liberty, and who would gladly, by a combination 
with foreign powers, or even at the expence of a 
civil war, have placed her on the throne of England* 

» State Trials, vol. i. p. 8z. ^ Camden, p»4-zo. 

Spotfwood, p. 231. 

" Lefley, p. 71. It appears by Haynes, p. 521. 525. that Elizabeth 
Ii3d heard rumours of Norfolk's dealing with Murray } and charged 
the latter to inform her of the whole truth, which he accordingly did. 
See alfo the earl of Murray's letter produced on Norfolk's trial. 

Q The 



ELIZABETH. i6t 

The earls of Northumberland and Weftmoreland, chap. 
who poflefTed great power in the North, were leaders ^?J^1^ 
of this party; and the former nobleman made offer i^^j^, ' 
to the queen of Scots, by Leonard Dacres, brother 
to lord Dacres, that he would free her from confine- 
ment, and convey her to Scotland, or any other 
place to which fhe fhould think proper to retire ^. 
Sir Thomas and fir Edward Stanley, fons of the earl 
of Derby, fir Thomas Gerrard, P.olftone, and other 
gentlemen, whofe intereft lay in the neighbourhood 
of the place where Mary refided, concurred in the 
fame views ; and required that, in order to facilitate 
the execution of the fcheme, a diverfion fhould, iri 
the mean time, be made from the fide of Flanders "". 
Norfolk difcouraged, and even in appearance fup- 
prefTed, thefe confpiracies ; both becaufe his duty to 
J^lizabeth would not allow him to think of effecting 
his pui'pofe by rebellion, and becaufe he forefaw 
that, if the queen of Scots came into the poffefTion 
of thefe men, they would rather choofe for her huf- 
band the king of Spain, or fome foreign prince, who 
had power, as well as inclination, to re-eflablifh the 
catholic religion *. 

When men of honour and good principles, like 
the duke of Norfolk, engage in dangerous enter- 
prifes, they are commonly fo unfortunate as to be 
criminal by halves ; and while they balance between 
the execution of their defigns and their remorfes, 
their fear of puniihment and their hope of pardon, 
they render themfelves an eafy prey to their ene- 
mies. The duke, in order to reprefs the furmifes 
fpread againft him, fpoke contemptuoufly to Eliza- 
beth of the Scottifli alliance ; affirmed that his eflate 
in England was more valuable than the revenue of 
a kingdom wafted by civil wars and factions ; and 
declared that, when he amufed himfelf in his own 
tennis-court at Norwich amidft his friends and vaf- 

y Leflcy, p. 76. » Ibid.'p. 98. •* Ibid. p. 77. 

Vol. V. M fals. 



i62 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, fals, he deemed himfelf at lead a petty prince, znd 
^^^J^^ was fully fatisfied with his condition \ Finding 
,369. that he did not convince her by thefe affeverations, 
and that he was looked on with a jealous eye by the 
minifters, he retired to his country-feat without 
taking leave ^ He foon after repented of this mea- 
fure, and fet out on his return to courtg with a view 
of ufing every expedient to regain the queen's good 
graces ; but he was met at St. Alban's by Fitz-Gar- 
ret, lieutenant of the band of penfioners, by whom 
he was conveyed to Burnham, three miles from 
Windfor, where the court then refided ''. He was 
foon after committed to the Tower, under the cuf- 
tody of hr Henry Nevit \ Lefley, bifhop of Rofs, 
the queen of Scots' ambaffador, was examined, and 
confronted with Norfolk before the council *. The 
earl of Pembroke was confined to his own houfe. 
Arundel, Lumiey, and Throgmorton were taken 
into culfody. The queen of Scots herfelf was re- 
moved to Coventry ; all accefs to her was, during 
fome time, more ftriftly prohibited ; and vifcount 
Hereford was joined to the earls of Shrewfbury and 
Huntingdon in the office of guarding her. 
TnAiiiec- ^ RUMOUR had been diffufed in the North of an 
th« Nortli. intended Tebellion ; and the earl of Suflex, prefi- 
dent of York, alarmed with the danger, fent for 
Northumberland and Weftmoreland, in order to 
examine them ; but not finding any proof againffc 
them, he t^lowed them to depart. The report 
meanwhile gained ground daily ; and many appear- 
ances of its reality being difcovered, orders were 
difpatched by Elizabeth to thefe two noblemen to 
appear at court, and anfwer for their conduft ^. 
They had already proceeded fo far in their criminal 
defigns, that they dared not to truft themfelves in 
her hands : They had prepared meafures fpr a re- 

'^ Camden, p. 420. <^ Haynes, p. 528. ^ Ibid. p. 339. 

« Catmteii, p, 421. Hayucs, p. 540, ^ Leflty, p. Bo. 

S liayues, p. 55a. 

bellion 5 



ELIZABETH, 163 

bellidn ; had communicated their defign to Mary CHAP, 
and her miniders *" ; had entered into a correfpond- ^JLj„^ 
ence with the duke of Alva, governor of the Low 1569, 
Countries ; had obtained'his promife of a reinforce- 
ment of troops, and of a ftipply of arms and ammu- 
nition ; and had prevailed on him to fend over to 
London Chiapino Vitelli, one of his mod famous 
captains, on pretence of adjufling fome differences 
with the queen ; but in reality with a view of putting 
him at the head of the northern rebels. The fum- 
rnons, fent to the two earls, precipitated the rifing 
before they were fully prepared j and Northumber- 
land remained in fufpenfe between oppofite dangers, 
when he was informed that fome of his enemies 
were on the way with a commiffion to arrefl him. 
He took horfe inllaiitly, and haftened to his aflbciate 
Weflmoreland, whom he found furrotmded with his 
friends and valfals, and deliberating with regard to 
the meafures which he flioutd follow in the prefent 
emergence. They determined to begin the infur- 
tedion without delay ; and the great credit of thefe 
two noblemen, with that zeal for the catholic reli- 
gion which ftill prevailed in the neighbourhood, 
foon drew together multitudes of the common peo- 
ple. They publiihed a m^anifefto, in which they de- 
clared, that they intended to attempt nothing againfl 
the queen, to whom they avowed unfhaken alle- 
giance ; and that their fole aim was to re-eflabhfh 
the religion of iheir anceflors, to remove evil coun- 
fellors, and to reilore the duke of Norfolk and other 
faithful peers to their liberty and to the queen's fa- 
vour \ The numbers of the malcontents amounted 
to four thoufand foot and fixteen hundred horfe ; 
and they expected the.concurrence of all the catholics 
in England ^. 

^ H.iynes, p. 595. Sfrype, vol. ii. Append, p. 30. MS. \u the 
Advocates' Libiaiy, iiom Cote. Lib. Cal. c. 9. i Cabala, p. 169. 

Strype, vol. i. p. 54.7. ^ Stovve, p. 663.. 

' M 2 Ths 




e64 history of ENGLAND. 

The queen was not negligent in her own defence, 
and fhe had beforehand, from her prudent and wife 
'^rXoT' conduct, acquired the general good-will of her peo- 
ple, the bed fecurity of a fovereign ; infomuch that 
even the catholics in moft counties- expreffed an af- 
fection for her fervice ' ; and the duke of Norfolk 
himfelf, though he had loft her favour, and lay in 
confinement, was not wanting, as far as his fituation 
permitted, to promote the levies among his friends 
and retainers. Sulfex, attended by the earls of Rut- 
land, the lords Hunfdon, Evers, and Willoughby of 
Parham, marched againft the rebels at the head of 
feven thoufand men, and found them already ad- 
vanced to the bifliopric of Durham, of which they 
had taken pofTefTion. They retired before him to 
Hexham ; and hearing that the earl of Warwic and 
lord Clinton were advancing againft them with a 
greater body, they found no other refource than to 
difperfe themfelves without ftriking a blow. The 
common people retired to their houfes : The leaders 
fled into Scotland. Northumberland was found 
fkulking in that country, and was confined by Mur- 
ray in the caftle of Lochlevin. Weftmoreland re- 
ceived fhelter from the chieftains of the Kers and 
Scots, partifans of Mary ; and perfuaded them to 
make an inroad into England, with a view of ex- 
citing a quarrel between the two kingdoms. After 
they had committed great ravages, they retreated to 
their own country. This fudden and precipitate re- 
bellion was followed foon after by another ftill more 
imprudent, raifed by Leonard Dacres. Lord Hunf- 
don, at the head of the garrifon of Berwic, was able, 
without any other affiftance, to quell thefe rebels. 
Great feverity was exercifed againft fuch as had take» 
part in thefe rafh enterprifes. Sixty-fix petty con- 
ftables were hanged '" j and no lefs than eight hun- 
dred perfons are faid, on the whole, to have fufFered 

' Cabala, p. 170. Digges, p. 4, "^ Camden, p. 413, 

by 



i 



ELIZABETH. 165 

by the hands of the executioner ". But the queen Chap. 
was fo well pleafed with NorfoIk''s behaviour, that «_^~1L- 
file releafed him from the Tower; allowed him to j^$^^ 
live, though under fome (hew of confinement, in 
his own houfe ; and only exafted a promife from 
him not to proceed any farther in his negotiations 
with the queen of Scots ". 

Elizabeth now found that the detention of Mary 
was attended with all the ill confequences which flie 
had forefeen when fhe firft embraced that meafure. 
This latter princefs, recovering, by means of her 
misfortunes and her own natural good fenfe, from 
that delirium into which fhe feems to have been 
thrown during her attachment to Bothwel, had be- 
haved with fuch modefty and judgment, and even 
dignity, that every one v/ho approached her was 
charmed v^ith her demeanor ; and her friends were 
enabled, on fome plaufible grounds, to deny the 
reality of all thofe crimes which had been imputed 
to her ^ Compailion for her fituation, and the ne- 
ceffity of procuring ber liberty, proved an incite- 
ment among all her partifans to be aftive in pro- 
moting her caufe ; and as her deliverance from cap- 
tivity, it was thought, could nowife be effefted 
but by attempts dangerous to the efhablifhed govern- 
ment, Ehzabeth had reafon to expe<S little tranquil- 
lity fo long as the Scottifli queen remained a prifoner 
in her hands. But as this inconvenience had been, 
preferred to the danger of allowing that princefs to 
enjoy her liberty, and to feek relief in all the catholic 
courts of Europe, it behoved the queen to fupport 
the meafure which fhe had adopted, and to guard, 
by every prudent expedient, againft the mifchiefs 
to which it was expofed, She fliil flattered Mary 
with hopes of her protection, maintained an am- 
biguous conduft between that queen and her ene- 

n Lefley, p. 82. ° Ibid. p. 98. Camden, p. 4Z9, 

Haynes, p. 597. P Lefley, p. 231, Haynes, p. 511. 548. 

M 1 mies 



,56 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, mies In Scotland, negotiated perpetually concerning 
•^^' the terms of her reiloration, made conilant pro- 
j ,6 "^ feffions of friendfliip to her ; and by thefe artifices 
endeavoured both to prevent her from niaking any 
defperate efforts for her deliverance, and to latisfy 
the French and Spanifli ambafladors, who never in- 
termitted their Iblicitations, lometimes accompanied 
with menaces, in her behalf. This deceit was re- 
ceived with the fame deceit by the queen of Scots : 
Profeffions of confidence were returned by profef- 
fions equally infinccre : And v/hile an appearance of 
friendfliip was maintained on both fides, the animo- 
fity and jealoufy, which had long prevailed between 
them, became every day more inveterate and Incu- 
rable. Thefe two princeffes. In addrefs, capacity, 
aclivity, and fpirit, were nearly a match for each 
other ; but unhappily, Mary, befides her prefent 
forlorn condition, was always inferior, in perfonal 
condu6l and difcretion, as well as In povv'er, to her 
illufirious rival. 

Elizabeth and Mary wrr.'e at the fame time 
letters to the regent. The queen of Scots defired, 
that her marriage with Bothwel might be examined, 
und a divorce be legally pronounced between them. 
The queen of England gave Murray the choice of 
three conditions ; that Mary fliould be reftored to 
her dignity on certain terms ; that fhe lliould be 
affoclated with her fon, and the admlnlftratlon re- 
main in the regent's hands till the young prince 
"ihould come to yesrs of difcretion ; or that fhe 
•fliould be allowed to live at liberty as a private per- 
fon In Scotland, and have an honourable fettlement 
made In her favour '^. Murray fummoned a conven- 
tion of ftates, In order to deliberate on thefe pro- 
pofais of the two queens : No anfwer was made by 
thern to Msuy's letter, on pretence that ilie had 

^ MSS. in tlie Ativocatts' LibniiVj A. j-.^. j>. 137. from Cot, Lib, 
catai. CI. 

there 



ELIZABETH. i^-j 

there employed the flyle of a fovereign, addreiTmg chap. 
herfelf to her fubjeds ; but in reality, becaufe they i^J^^ 
faw that her requeft was calculated to prepare the 1369. 
way for a marriage with Norfolk, or fome powerful 
prince, who could fupport her caufe, and reflore her 
to the throne. They replied to Elizabeth, that the 
two former conditions were fo derogatory to the 
royal authority of their prince, that they could not 
fo much as deliberate concerning them : The third 
alone could be the fubjeft of treaty. It was evident 
that Elizabeth, in propofmg conditions fo unequal 
in their importance, invited the Scots to a re- 
fufal of thofe which were moil advantageous to 
Mary ; and as it was difficult, if not impollible, to 
adjuft all the terms of the third, fo as to render it 
fecure and eligible to all parties, it was concluded 
that fhe was not fmcere in any of them "■. 

It is pretended that Murray had entered into a ^si^- 
private negotiation with the queen, to get Mary de- 
livered into his hands ' ; and as Elizabeth found the 
detention of her in England fo dangerous, it is 
probable that flie would have been pleafed, on any 
honourable or fafe terms, to rid herfelf of a prifoner 
who gave her fo much inquietude'. But all thefe pro- 
jefts vanifhed by the fudden death of the regent, who 
was afl'affinated, in revenge of a private injury, by z^d Jan. 
a gentleman of the name of Hamilton. Murray was •^^aiima- 

^ r r rj 1.1 • i •!• • / tion of the 

a perion or conliderable vigour, abihties, and con- earl of 
ftancy ; but though he was not unfuccefsful, during Munay. 
his regency, in compofmg the diilenfions in Scot- 
land, his talents fhone out more eminently in the 
beginning than in the end of his life. His manners 
were rough and auflere ; and he polTeffed not that 
perfeft integrity, which frequently accompanies, and 
can alone atone for, that unamiable character. 

r Spotfwood, p. 230, 131. Lefley, pc 71. ^ Camden, p. 425. 

Lefley, p. 83. » Gee ngte [O] at the end of the volwine. 

M4 "By 



1570. 



1.68 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP. By the death of the regent, Scotland relapfed Intq 
■^^' anarchy. Mary's party aflembled together, and made 
themfelves mafters of Edinburgh. The caftle, com- 
manded by Kirkaldy of Grange, feemed to favour her 
caufe J and as many of the principal nobiUty had em- 
braced that party, it became probable, though the 
people were in general averfe to her, that her autho- 
rity might again acquire the afcendant. To check its 
progrefs, Elizabeth difpatched Suflex with an army 
to the North, under colour of chaftifmg the ravages 
committed by the borderers. He entered Scotland^ 
and laid wafte the lands of the Kers and Scots, feized 
the caftle of Hume, and committed hoftilities on all 
Mary's partifans, who, he faid, had offended his mif- 
trefs by harbouring the Englifh rebels. Sir Wil- 
liam Drury was afterwards fent with a body of troops, 
and he threw down the houfes of the Hamiltons 
■who were engaged in the fame faftion. The Englifh 
armies were afterwards recalled by agreement with 
the queen of Scots, who promifed, in return, that no 
French troops fhould be introduced into Scotland, 
and that the Englifh rebels fhould be delivered up to 
the queen by her partifans ". 

But though the queen, covering herfelf with the 
pretence of revenging her own quarrel, fo far con- 
tributed to fupport the party of the young king of 
Scots, ftie was cautious not to declare openly againft 
Mary ; and fhe even fent a requeft, which was equi- 
valent to a command, to the enemies of that princefs, 
not to eleft, during fome time, a regent in the place 
of Murray *. Lenox, the king's grandfather, was 
therefore chofen temporary governor, under the 
title of Lieutenant. Hearing afterwards that Mary's 
partifans, inftead of delivering up Weftmoreland, 
and the other fugitives, as they had promifed, 
had allowed them to efcape into Flanders j fhe 

^ Lefley, p, 91, '"' Spotfwood, p. 740. 

permitted 



ELIZABETH. 169 

permitted the king's party to give Lenox the title of C H A P. 
Regent % and fhe fent Randolph, as her refident, ^^^L, 
to maintain a correfpondence with him. But not- ^^-^^ 
wjthilanding this Itep, taken in favour of Mary's 
enemies, fhe never laid afide her ambiguous conduct, 
or quitted the appearance of amity to that princefs. 
Being importuned by the bilhop of R(^fs, and her 
other agents, as well as by foreign ambaffadors, fhe 
twice procured a fufpenfion of arms between the 
Scottilh faftions, and by that means flopped the 
hands of the regent, who was likely to obtain ad- 
vantages over the'oppofite party \ ■ By thefe feeni- 
ing contrarieties fhe kept alive the factions in Scot- 
land, increafed their mutual animofity, and rendered 
the whole country a fcene of devaftation and of mi- 
fery ^. She had no intention to conquer the king- 
dom, and confequently no interefl or defign to in- 
ftigate the parties againfl: each other ; but this con- 
iequence was an accidental etfed: of her cautious 
politics, by which ilie was engaged, as far as poffible, 
to keep on good terms with the queen of Scots, and 
never to violate the appearances of friendfhip with 
her, at lead thofe of neutrality % 

The better to amufe Mary v/ith the profpe<Eb of 
an accommodation, Cecil and fir Walter Mildmay 
were fent to her with propofals from Ehzabeth. 
The terms were iomewhat rigorous, fuch as a cap- 
tive queen might expect from a jealous rival ; and 
they thereby bore the greater appearance of fmcerity 
on the part of the Englifh court. It was required 
that the queen of Scots, befides renouncing all title 
to the crown of England during the life-time of Eli- 
zabeth, (hould make a perpetual league, offenfive 
and defenfive, between the kingdoms ; that Ihe 
(hould marry no Enghfliman without Elizabeth's 
conient, nor any other perfon without the confent 

" Spotlwood, p. 241. r KmJ. p. 243. * Crawford, p. 136. 

* See note [P] at the end of the volu^xie. 

15 of 



vjo HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, of the ftates of Scotland ; that compenfation fhould 
^^~" be made for the late ravages committed in England ; 
' 1570. ^h^t juftice fhould be executed on the murderers of 
king Henry ; that the young prince fhould be fent 
into England, to be educated there ; and that fix 
hoflages, all of them noblemen, fhould be delivered 
to the queen of England, with the caflle of Hume, 
and fome other fortrefs, for the fecurity of perform- 
ance ''. Such were the conditions upon which Eli- 
zabeth promifed to contribute her endeavours to- 
wards the refloration of the depofed queen. The 
neceffity of Mary's affairs obliged her to confent to 
them ; and the kings of France and Spain, as well 
as the pope, when confulted by her, approved of 
her conduct ; chiefly on account of the civil wars, 
by which all Europe was at that time agitated, and 
which incapacitated the catholic princes from giving 
her any afliftance ^ 

Elizabeth's commiilioners propofed alfo to 
Mary a plan of accommodation with her fubjects in 
Scotland ; and after fome reafoning on that head, 
it was agreed that the queen fhould require 
Lenoxj the regent, to fend commiflioners, in order 
to treat of conditions under her mediation. The 
partifans of Mary boafled, that all terms were fully 
fettled with the court of England, and that the 
Scottifli rebels would foon be conllrained to fub- 
mit to the authority of their fovereign.: But Eliza- 
beth took care that thefe rumours fhould meet with 
no credit, and that the king's party fhould not be 
difcouraged, nor fmk too low in their demands. 
Cecil wrote to inform the regent, that all the 
queen of England's propofals, fo far from being 
fixed and irrevocable, were to be difculTed anew in 
the conference ; and defired him to fend commif- 
lioners who fliould be conilant in the king's caufe, 

* ^ Spotfwood, p. 24.5. Lefley, p. loi. c Lcfley, p. 103, S^c. 

an4 



f 



ELIZABETH. 171 

and cautious not to make conceilions which might C hap, 
be prejudicial to their party ^ Suflex alfo, in his ,^^^^^ 
letters, dropped hints to the fame purpofe ; and ,570. 
Elizabeth herfelf faid to the abbot of Dunfermling, 
whom Lenox had fent to the court of England, that 
fhe would not infift on Mary's reftoration, pro- 
vided the Scots could make the juflice of their caufe 
appear to her fatisfadion ; and that, even if their 
reafons fhould fall fhort of full conviction, Ihe 
would take effedual care to provide for their future 
fecurity ^ 

The parliament of Scotland appointed the earl ^^^^^^'^^ 
of Morton and fir James Macgill, together with 
the abbot of Dunfermling, to manage the treaty. 
Thefe commiffioners prefented memorials, contain- 
ing reafons for the depofition of their queen ; and 
they feconded their arguments with examples drawn 
from the Scottifh hiftory, with the authority of laws, 
and with the fentiments of many famous divines. 
The lofty ideas which Elizabeth had entertained, of 
the abfolute, indefeafible right of fovereigns, made 
her be fhocked with thefe republican topics ; and 
ihe told the Scottifn commiffioners, that fhe was 
nowife fatisfied with their reafons for juflifying the 
conduft of their countrymen ; and that they might 
therefore, without attempting any apology, proceed 
to open the conditions which they required for their 
fecurity ^ They replied, that their commiffion did 
not empower them to treat of any terms which 
might infringe the title and fovereignty of their 
young king, but they would gladly hear whatever 
propofals fliould be made them by her majefly. The 
conditions recommended by the queen were not dif- 
advantageous to Mary ; but as the commiffioners ftill 
infifted, that they were not authorifed to treat in any 
manner concerning the reftoration of that princefs ^, 

^ Spotfwood, p, 24.1;. « Ihid. p. 247, 448. f Ibid', 

p. 248, 249, S Haynes, p. 623. 

the 



172 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, the conferences were neceflarily at an end ; and 
■^^' Elizabeth difmilTed the Scottifh commiflioners with 

' ,^^,^ injunftions, that they fliould return, after having 
procured more ample powers from their parliament \ 
The bifhop of Rofs openly complained to the Eng- 
lifh council, that they had abufed his miflrefs by 
hir promifes and profeflions ; and Mary herfelf was 
no longer at a lofs to judge of Elizabeth's infm- 
cerity. By reafon of thefe difappointments, matters 
came ftill nearer to extremities between the two 
princeiTes ; and the queen of Scots, finding all her 
hopes eluded, was more flrongly incited to make, 
at all hazards, every pofiible attempt for her liberty 
and fecurity. 

An incident aifo happened about this time, which 
tended to widen the breach between Mary and Eli- 
zabeth, and to increafe the vigilance and jealoufy 
of the latter princefs.. Pope Pius V. who. had fuc- 
ceeded Paul, after having endeavoured in vain to 
conciliate by gentle means the friendfhip of Eliza- 
beth, whom his predecefibr's violence had irritated, 
iifued at laft a bull of excommunication againfi: 
her, deprived her of all title to the crown, and ab- 
folved her fubjecls from their oaths of allegiance*. 
It feems probable, that this attack on the queen's 
authority was made in concert with Mary, who 
intended by that means to forward the northern 
rebellion ; a meafure which was at that time in 
agitation*'. John Felton affixed this bull to the 
gates of the bifhop of London's palace ; and fcorn- 
ing either to fly or to deny the fad:, he was feized 
and condemned, and received the crown of martyr^^ 
dom, for which he feems to have entertained fo vio» 
lenf an ambition '. 

* Spotfwood, p. 249, 250, &c. Lefley, p. 133. i'^6. Camdeiij 
p. 4.31, 43«. i Camden, p. 437- ^ Ibid. p. 441. 

from Cdjetanus's Life of Pius V. * Camden, p. 4.12. 

A NEW 



I 



ELIZABETH. 173 

A NEW parliament, after five years' interval, was chap. 
affembled at Weftminfler ; and as the queen, by the ^J^JlL. 
rage of the pope againfl: her, was become ftill more ,571, 
the head of the ruling party, it might be expefted, ad of Apr. 
both from this incident and from her own prudent ^^JJ^^ '^" 
and vigorous condu6t, that her authority over the 
two houfes would be abfolutely uncontrollable. It 
was fo in faft ; yet is it remarkable, that it pre- 
vailed not without fome fmall oppofition ; and that 
too arifmg chiefly from the height of zeal for pro- 
teftantifm ; a difpofition of the Englifli, which in 
general contributed extremely to increafe the queen's 
popularity. We fhall be fomewhat particular in re- 
lating the tranfadions of this felTion, becaufe they 
fhew, as well the extent of the royal power during 
that age, as the character of Elizabeth, and the ge- 
nius of her government. It will be curious alfo to 
obferve the faint dawn of the fpirit of liberty among- 
the Englifh, the jealoufy with which that fpirit was 
reprefled by the fovereign, the imperious conduft 
which was maintained in oppofition to it, and the 
eafe with which it was fubdued by this arbitrary 
princefs. 

The lord keeper Bacon, after t"he fpeaker of the 
commons was elefted, told the parliament, in the 
queen's name, that fhe enjoined them not to meddle 
with any matters of ftate "" : Such was his expref- 
fion ; by which he probably meant, the queftions 
of the queen's marriage and the fucceffion, about 
which they had before given her fome uneafmefs : 
For as to the other great points of government, 
alliances, peace and war, or foreign negotiations, 
no parliament in that age ever prefumed to take 
them under confideration, or queftion, in thefe par- 
ticulars, the condud: of their fovereign, or of his 
minifters. 

In the former parliament, the puritans had in- 
troduced feven bills for a farther reformation in re- 

^ D'Ewes, p. 14.1, 

ligion J 



IS7I. 



S74 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP. Hgion ; but they had not been able to prevail in any 
^^* . one of them ". This houfe of commons had fitten" 
0. very few days, when Stricland, a member, re- 
vived one of the bills, that for the amendment of 
the hturgy ^ The chief objection, which he men- 
tioned, was the fign of the crofs in baptifm. Another 
member added the kneeling at the facrament ; and 
remarked that, if a pollure of humiHation were re- 
quifite in that aft of devotion, it were better that 
the communicants fliould throw themfelves proftrate' 
on the ground, in order to keep at the wideil dif- 
tance from former fuperftition p. 

Religion was a point, of which Elizabeth was, 
if poffible, flill more jealous than of matters of 
ftate. She pretended that, in quality of fupreme 
head or governor of the church, fhe was fully em- 
powered, by her prerogative alone, to decide all 
queflions which might arife with regard to doc- 
trine, difcipline, or worfhip ; and fhe never would 
allow her parliaments fo much as to take thefe 
points into confideration \ The courtiers did nofr 
forget to infift on this topic : The treafurer of 
the houfehold, though he allowed that any herefy 
might be repreifed by parliament, (a conceffion 
which feems to have been rafli and unguarded ; 
fmce the acl, inverting the crov/n v/ith the fupre- 
macy, or rather recognifmg that prerogative, gave 
the lovereign full power to reform all herelies,) yet 
he affirmed, that it belonged to the queen alone, as 
head of the church, to regulate every queflion of 
ceremony in worfhip '. The comptroller feconded 
this argument ; infilled on the extent of the queen's 
prerogative ; and faid that the houfe might, from^ 
former examples, have taken warning not to meddle 
■with fuch matters. One Piftor oppofed thefe re- 
monflrances of the courtiers. He was fcandaUfed,-' 

n D'Ewes, p. 185. " Ibid. p. 156, 157. P Ibid, p. 16^7; 

3 Ibid. p. 158. f Ibid. p. 166. 

he 



ELIZABETH, i7S 

he faid, that affairs of fuch infinite confequence CHAP. 

(namely, kneeling and making the fign of the crols) ^^^^,^^^ 

fliould be paffed over fo flightly. Thefe qiieflions, ,57,, 

he added, concern the falvation of fouls, and in- 

tereft every one more deeply than the monarchy of 

the whole world. This caufe he fhewed to be the 

caufe of God ; the reft were all but terrene, yea 

trifles in companion, call them ever fo great : Sub- 

fidies, crowns, kingdoms, he knew not what M^eight 

they had when laid in the balance with fubje£ts of 

fuch unfpeakable importance'. Though the zeal 

of this member feems to have been approved of, 

the houfe, overawed by the prerogative, voted upon 

the queftion, that a petition ihould be prefented to 

her majefty, for her licence to proceed farther in 

this bill ; and, in the mean time, that they iliould 

flop all debate or reafoning concerning it '. 

Matters would probably have refted here, had 
not the queen been fo highly offended with Stric- 
land's prefumption, in moving the bill for reform- 
ation of the Uturgy, that fhe fummoned him before 
the council, and prohibited him thenceforth from 
appearing in the houfe of commons ". This aft of 
power was too violent even for the fubmiffive par- 
liament to endure. Carleton took notice of the 
matter ; complained that the liberties of the houfe 
were invaded ; obferved that Stricland was not a 
private man, but reprefented a multitude ; and 
moved, that he might be fent for, and, if he were 
guilty of any offence, might anfwer for it at the bar 
of the houfe, which he infmuated to be the only 
competent tribunal '^. Yelverton enforced the prin- 
ciples of liberty with ftill greater boldnefs. He faid, 
that the precedent was dangerous : And though 
in this happy time of lenity, among fo many good 
and honourable perfonages as were at prefent in- 
vefted with authority, nothing of extremity or 



* D'Ewes, p. J 66. « Ibid. p. 167. ^ Ibid. n. 175. 

w Ibid. 



mjury 



I57I. 



175 HISTORY OF ENGLANt). 

CHAP, injury was to be apprehended ; yet the times migh^ 
^^' alter ; what now is permitted, might hereafter be 
conftrued as duty ; and might be enforced even on 
the ground of the prefent permiffion. He added, 
that all matters not treafonable, or which implied not 
too much derogation of the imperial crown, might, 
without offence, be introduced into parliament ; 
where every queftion that concerned the commu- 
nity muft be confidered, and where even the right 
of the crown itfelf muft finally be determined. He 
remarked, that men fat not in that houfe in their 
private capacities, but as elefted by their country ; 
and though it was proper that the prince fhould re- 
tain his prerogative, yet was that prerogative limited 
by law : As the fovereign could not of himfelf make 
laws, neither could he break them, merely from his 
own authority ''. 

These principles were popular, and noble, and 
generous ; but the open aifertion of them was, at 
this time, fomewhat new in England : And the 
courtiers were more warranted by prefent pradice, 
when they advanced a contrary dodrine. The 
treafurer warned the houfe to be cautious in their 
proceedings ; neither to venture farther than their 
affured warrant might extend, nor hazard their good 
opinion with her majefty in any doubtful caufe. 
The member, he faid, whofe attendance they re- 
quired, was not reftrained on account of any liberty 
of fpeech, but for his exhibiting a bill in the houfe 
againft the prerogative of the queen ; a temerity 
which was not to be tolerated. And he concluded 
with obferving, that even fpeeches, made in that 
houfe, had been queftioned and examined by the 
fovereign^. Cleere, another member, remarked, 
that the fovereign's prerogative is not fo much as 
difputable, and that the fafety of the queen is the 
fafety of the fubjed:. He added, that, in queftions 
of divinity, every man was for his inftrudion to 

* D'Ewes, p. 175, 176. Y Ibid, p. 175. 

repair 



ELIZABETH. 177 

repair to his ordinary ; and he feems to iniinuate, CHAP. 
that the bifhops themfelves, for their inftru^tion, yJ^^Z^, 
mufl repair to the queen''. Fleetwood obferved, ,^yj. ' 
that, in his memory, he knew a man, who, in the 
fifth of the prefent queen, had been called to ac- 
count for a fpeech in the houfe. But left this ex- 
ample fhould be deemed too recent, he would in- 
form them, from the parliament rolls, that, in the 
reign of Henrv V. a bifhop was committed to pri- 
fon by the king's command, on account of his free- 
dom of fpeech ; and the parliament prefumed not 
to go farther than to be humble fuitors for him : 
In the fubfequent reign the fpeaker himfelf was 
committed with another member; and the houfe 
found no other remedy than a like fubmiffive ap- 
plication. He advifed the houfe to have recourfe 
to the fame expedient ; and not to prefume either 
to fend for their member, or demand him as of 
right *. During this fpeech, thofe members of the 
privy-council who fat in the houfe whifpered to- 
gether ; upon which the fpeaker moved, that the 
houfe fhould make ftay of all farther proceedings : 
A motion which was immediately complied with. 
The queen, finding that the experiment which fhe 
had made was hkely to excite a great ferment, faved 
her honour by this filence of the houfe ; and left the 
queftion might be refumed, flie fent next day to 
Stricland her permiffion to give his attendance in. 
parliament ''. 

Notwithstanding this rebuke from the throne, 
the zeal of the commons ftill engaged them to con- 
tinue the difcuffion of thofe other bills which re- 
garded religion ; but they were interrupted by a ftill 
more arbitrary proceeding of the queen, in which 
the lords condefcended to be her inftruments. This 
houfe fent a meffage to the commons, defiring that a 
committee might attend them. Some members were 
appointed for that purpofe ; and the upper houfe 

* D'Ewes, p. 175. a Ibid, p, 176, ^ Idem, ibid. 

Vol. V. N acquainted 



I57» ■ 



178 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, acquainted them, that the queen's majefly being in-* 
-^^' formed of the articles of reformation which they 
had canvailed, approved of them, intended to pub- 
hfh them, and to make the bifhops execute them, 
by virtue of her royal authority, as fupreme head of 
the church of England : But that fhe would not 
permit them to be treated of in parliament ^ The 
ho'ufe, though they did not entirely ftop proceed- 
ings on account of this injunftion, feem to have 
been nowife offended at fnch haughty treatment ; 
and in the iffue all the bills came to nothing. 

A MOTION made by Robert Bell, a puritan, 
againft an exclufive patent granted to a company of 
merchants in Briftol '', gave alfo occafion to feveral 
remarkable incidents. The queen, fome days after 
the motion was made, fent orders by the mouth 
of the fpeaker, commanding the houfe to fpend 
little time in motions, and to avoid long fpeeches- 
All the mem.bers underftood that fhe had been of- 
fended, becaufe a matter had been moved which 
feemed to touch her prerogative % Fleetwood ac- 
cordingly fpoke of this delicate fubjeft. He ob- 
ferved, that the queen had a prerogative of granting 
patents ; that to queftion the validity of any patent, 
was to invade the royal prerogative ; that'all foreign 
trade was entirely fubje^t to the pleafure of the 
fovereign ; that even the ftatute which gave liberty 
of commerce, admitted of all prohibitions from the 
erown ; and that the prince, when he granted an 
exclufive patent, only employed the power veiled in 
him, and prohibited all others from dealing in any 
paiticular branch of commerce. He quoted the 
clerk of the parliament's book, to prove that no 
man might fpeak in parliament of the ftatute of wills, 
unlefs the king firft gave licence ; becaufe the royal 
prerogative in the wards was thereby touched. He 
jEhewed likev/ife the ftatutes of Edward I. Edward III. 

« DXwes, p. 180, 135. ^ Ibid. p. 1S5. « Ibid. p. 159. 

<) and 



ELIZABETH. 179 

and Henry IV. with a faving of the prerogative. C H a p. 
"^And in Edward YI.'s time, the proteftor was ap- ■^^• 
plied to, for his allowance to mention matters of 
prerogative *. 

•SlP^. Humphrey Gilbert, the gallant and re- 
nowned fea-adventurer, carried thefe topics ftill far- 
ther. He endeavoured to prove the motion made 
by Bell to be a vain device, and perilous to be treated 
of; fmce it tended to the derogation of the prero- 
gative imperial, which whoever fliould attempt fo 
much as in fancy, could not, he faid, be otherwife 
accounted than an open enemy. For what difference 
is there between faying that the queen is not to ufe 
the privilege of the crown, and faying that (he is not 
queen ? And though experience has fhewn fo much 
clemency in her majefty, as might, perhaps, make 
fubjefts forget theii* duty ; it is not good to fport or 
venture too much with princes. He reminded them 
of the fable of the hare, who. Upon the proclama- 
tion that all horned beads Ibould depart the court, 
immediately fled, leP: his ears fhould be conftrued to 
be horns ; and by ttiis apologue he feems to infmuate, 
that even thofe who heard or permitted fuch danger- 
ous fpeeches, would not themfelves be entirely free 
from danger. Fie defired them to beware, left, if 
they meddled farther with thefe matters, the queen 
might look to her own power ; and finding herfelf 
able to fupprefs their challenged liberty, and to ex- 
ert an arbitrary authority, might imitate thvs example 
of Lewis XI. of France, who, as he termed it, de- 
livered the crown from wardfhip ^. 

Though this fpeech gave fome difguft, nobody, 
at the time, replied any thing, but that fir Humphrey 
miilook the meaning of the houfe, and of the mem- 
ber vvho made the motion : They never had any 
other purpofe, than to reprefent their grievances, in 
due and feemiy form, unto her majefty. But in a iub- 

f D'Esves, p. 160. E Ibid. p. 168. 

N 2 ■ fequent 



I57I' 



igo HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, fequent debate, Peter Wentworth, a man of a fup?- 
■^^' rior free fpirit, called that fpeech an infult on the 
houfe J noted fir Humphrey's difpofition to flatter 
and fawn on the prince ; compared him to the ca- 
melion, which can change itfelf into all colours, ex- 
cept white ; and recommended to the houfe a due 
care of liberty of fpeech, and of the privileges of par- 
liament **. It appears, en the whole, that the motion 
againfl the exclufive patent had no effeft. Bell, the 
member who firll introduced it, was fent for by the 
council, and was feverely reprimanded for his te- 
merity. He returned to the houfe with fuch an 
amazed countenance, that all the members, well in- 
formed of the reafon, were flruck with terror ; and 
during fome time no one durfi; rife to fpeak of any 
matter of importance, for fear of giving offence to 
the queen and the council. Even after the fears of 
the commons were fomewhat abated, the members 
fpoke with extreme precaution ^ and by employ- 
ing mod: of their difcourfe in preambles and apo- 
logies, they Ihewed their confcious terror of the 
rod which hung over them. Wherever any delicate 
point was touched, though ever fo gently ; nay 
feemed to be approached, though at ever fo great 
a diftance, the whifper ran about the houfe, " The 
*' queen v;ill be offended ;, the council will be ex- 
*' treniely difpleafed :" i^nd by thefe furmifes men 
were warned of the danger to which they expofed 
themfelves. It is remarkable, that the patent, which- 
the queen defended with fuch imperious violence, 
was contrived for the profit of four courtiers, and 
was attended with the utter ruin of feven or eight 
thoufand of her induitrious fubjects '^ 

atjthiviay. Thus every thing which palfed the two houfes 
was extremely refpeclful and fubmilTive ; yet did 
the queen think it incumbent on her, at the con- 
clufioa of the feflion, to check, and that with great " 

t D'Ewes, p. J75, i Ibid. p. 24a, 

feverity,. 



I 



ELIZABETH. i«i 

feverity, thofe feeble efforts of liberty, which had CHAP, 
appeared in the motions and fpeeches of fome mem- yJ^^^Lj 
bers. The lord keeper told the commons, in her ,^^,. 
majefly's name, that, though the majority of the 
iower houfe had (hewn themfelves in their proceed- 
ings difcreet and dutiful, yet a few of them had dif- 
covered a contrary character, and had juftly merited 
the reproach of audacious, arrogant, and prefump- 
tuous : Contrary to their duty both as fubje£ls and 
parliament men, nay contrary to the exprefs in- 
junftions given them from the throne at the be- 
ginning of the feffion, injunctions which it might 
well become them to have better attended to, 
they had prefumed to call in queftion her majefty's 
grants and prerogatives. But her majefty warns 
them, that fmce they thus wilfully forget them- 
felves, they are otherwife to be admoniihed : Some 
other fpecies of cGrre<51:ion muft be found for them ; 
fmce neither the commands of her majefty, nor the 
example of their wifer brethren, can reclaim their 
audacious, arrogant, and prefumptuous folly, by. 
which th^^y are thus led to meddle with what nowife 
belongs to them, and what lies beyond the compafs 
of their underftanding "". 

In all thefe tranfa<Mon3 appears clearly the opi- 
nion which Elizabeth had entertained of the duty 
and authority of parliaments. They were not to 
canvas any matters of (late ; ftill lefs were they to 
meddle with the church. Queftions of either kind 
were far above their reach, and w^re appropriated 
to the prince alone, or to thofe councils and mi- 
nifters with whom he was pleafed to entruft them. 
What then was the office of parliaments ? They 
might give dire<ftions for the due tanning of leather, 
or milling of cloth ; for the prefervation of pheafants 
and partridges ; for the reparation of bridges and 
highways ; for the puniihment of vagabonds or com- 
mon beggars. Regulations concerning the police of 

k D'Ewes, p. 151, 

N 3 the 




1371. 



i82 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

the country came properly under their infpeclion ; 
and the laws of this kind which they prefcribed had, 
if not a greater, yet a more durable authority, than 
thofe which were' derived folely from the proclama- 
tions of the foyereign. Precedents or reports could 
fix a rule for decifions in private property, or the 
punifhment of crimes ; but no alteration or inno- 
vation in the municipal law could proceed from any 
other fource than the parliament ; nor would the 
courts of juftice be induced to change their efla- 
blillied praftice by an order in council. But th^ 
mod acceptable part of parliamentary proceedings 
was the granting of fubfidies ; the attainting and 
punifhing of the obnoxious nobility, or any minifter 
of ftate after his fall ; the countenancing of fuch 
great efforts of power, as might be deemed fome- 
what exceptionable, when they proceeded entirely 
from the fovereign. The redrefs of grievances was 
fometimes promifed to the people ; but feldom could 
have place, while it was an eflablifhed rule, that the 
prerogatives of the crown muil not be abridged, or 
fo much as queliioned and examined in parhament. 
Even though monopolies and exciufive companies 
had already reached an enormous height, and were 
every day increafmg to the deftruction of all hberty, 
and extindicn of all induftry ; it was criminal in 
a member to propofe, in the nroil dutiful and regu- 
lar manner, a parliamentary application againfl any 
of them. 

These maxims of government were not kept 
fecret by Elizabeth, or fmoothed over by any fair 
appearances or plaufible pretences. They were 
openly avowed in her fpeeches and meffages to par- 
liament ; and were accompanied with all the haugh- 
tinefs, nay fometimes biiternefs, of expreffion, which 
the meaneft fervant could look for from his offended 
mafter. Yet notwithflanding this conduct, Eliza- 
beth continued to be the moff popular fovereign 
|hat ever fwayed the fceptre of England ; becaufe 

the 



ELIZABETH. 183 

the maxims of her reign were conformable to the C H a p. 
principles of the times, and to the opinion generally ^^_^^,....^l.^ 
entertained with regard to the conftitution. The 157;. 
continued encroachments of popular alfemblies on 
Elizabeth's fucceflbrs have fo changed our ideas in 
thefe matters, that the palfages above mentioned ap- 
pear to us extremely curious, and even at iirll fur- 
prifmg; but they were fo little remarked during 
the time, that neither Camden, though a contem- 
porary writer, nor any other hiftorian, has taken 
any notice of them. So abfolute indeed was the au- 
thority of the crown, that the precious fpark of li- 
berty had been kindled, and v/as preferved, by the 
puritans alone ; and it was to this fed, whofe prin- 
ciples appear fo frivolous and habits fo ridiculous, 
that the Englifli owe the whole freedom of their 
conilitutiori. Acluated by that zeal which belongs 
to innovators, and by the courage which enthufiafm 
infpires, they hazarded the utnioft indignation of 
their fovereign ; and employing all their induflry to 
be eleded into parliament, a matter not difiicult 
while a feat was rather regarded as a burden than 
an advantage ', they firft acquired a majority in that 
aifembly, and then obtained an afcendant over the 
church and monarchy. 

The following were the principal laws enaded 
this feffion. It was declared treafon, during the 
life-time of the queen, to affirm, that llie was not 
the lawful fovereign, or that any other poiTelied a 
preferable title, or that fhe was a heretic, fchifmatic, 
or infidel, or that the laws and ftatntes cannot hmit 
and determine the right of the crown and the fuc- 
ceifor thereof: To maintain in writing or printing, 
that any perfon except the natural iffiie of her body, 
is or ought to be the queen's heir or fucceifor, fub- 
jeded the perfon and all his abettors, for the firfl 

' It appeared this feflion, that a bribe of four pounds had been given 
to a mayor for a feat in parliaiient. D'Ewes, p. liJi. It is probable 
that tlie member had no other view than the privilege of being free 
from avr^fts. 

N 4 offence. 




i84 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

offence, to imprifonm^nt during a year, and to 
the forfeiture of half their goods : The fecond of- 
jy^^ fence fubjeded them to the penalty of a premunire "*. 
This law was plainly levelled againft the queen of 
Scots and her partifans ; and implied an avowal, 
that Ehzabeth never intended to declare her fuc- 
cefTor. It may be noted, that the uiual phrafe of 
ia^uujul -Jfue^ which the parliament thought indecent 
towards the queen, as if (he could l?e fuppofed to 
have any other, was changed into that of natural 
ijfue. But this alteration was the fource of pleafantry 
during the time ; and fome fufpefted a deeper de- 
fign, 2lc if Leicelter intended, in caie ol'the queen's 
demife, to produce fome baftard of his own, and 
affirm that he was her offspring ", 

It was alfo enafted, that whofoever by bulls 
fhould publifli abfolutions or other refcripts of the 
pope, or fhould, by means of them, reconcile any 
man to the church of Rome, fuch offenders, as well 
as thofe who were fo reconciled, fhould be guilty of 
treafon. The penalty of a premunire was impofed 
on every one who imported any Agnus Dei, crucifix, 
or fuch other implement of fuperflition, confecrated 
by the pope ^ The former laws againft ufury were 
enforced by a new flatute '', A fupply of one fub- 
fidy and two fifteenths was granted by parliament. 
The queen, as flie was determined to yield to them 
none of her power, was very cautious in afking them 
for any fupply. She endeavoured, either by a rigid 
frugality to make her ordinary revenues fuffice for 
the neceffities of the crown, or fhe employed her 
prerogative, and procured money by the granting 
of patents, monopolies, or by fome fuch ruinous 
expedient. 

Though Elizabeth poffeffed fuch uncontrolled au- 
thority over her parHaments, and fuch extenfive influ« 



«> 13 Eliz. c. I, n Camden, \>. 43(1. « isEliz. c. ». 

f Ibid. c. 8. 

enc« 



ELIZABETH. ,8^ 

cnce over her people; though during a courfe of thir- chap. 
t:een years die had maintahicd the public tranquillity, ^^• 
which was only interrupted by the hafty and ill-con- ""'^y'^ 
certed infurredlion in the North ; fhe was flill kept in 
great anxiety, and felt her throne perpetyally totter 
under her. The violent commotions excited in France 
and the Low Countries, as well as in Scotland, feemed 
in one view to fecure her againfi: any diflurbance ; 
but they ferved, on more reflexion, to inftiuft her 
in the danger of her fituation, when flie remarked 
that England, no lefs than thefe neighbouring coun- 
tries, contained the feeds of intefiine difcord, the 
dilferences of religious opinion, and the furious into- 
lerance and animofity of the oppofite fectaries. 

The league formed at Bayonne in 1566 for the civil wars 
extermination of the proteftants, had not been con- °^ Fiance, 
eluded fo fecretly but intelligence of it had reached 
Conde, Coligni, and the other leaders of the hugo- 
nots ; and finding that the meafures of the court 
agreed with their fufpicions, they determined to pre- 
vent the cruel perfidy of their enemies, and to ftrike 
a blow before the catholics were aware of the danger. 
The hugonots, though difperfed over the whole king- 
dom, formed a kind of feparate empire ; and being 
clofely united, as well by their religious zeal as by 
the dangers to which they were perpetually expofed, 
they obeyed, with entire fubmiirion,the orders of their 
leaders, who were ready on every fignal to fly to arms. 
The king and queen-mother were living in great fecu- 
rity at Montceaux in Brie, when they found them- 
felves furrounded by proteflant troops, which had fe- 
cretly marched thither from all quarters ; and had not 
a body of Swifs come fpeedily to their relief, and con- 
duced them with great intrepidity to Paris, they 
mufl have fallen, without refiftance, into the hands 
of the malcontents. A battle was afterwards fought 
in the plains of St. Dennis ; where, though the old 
conflable Montmorency, the general of the catho- 

15 lics,^ 




f57i' 



HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

lies, was killed combating bravely at the head of hi$ 
troops, the hugonots were finally defeated. Conde, 
collecting his broken forces, and receiving a ftrong 
reinforcement from the German proteftants, appeared 
again in the field ; and laying fiege to Chartres, a 
place of great importance, obliged the court to agree 
to a new accommodation. 

So great was the mutual animofity of thofe re- 
ligionifts, that even had the leaders on both fides 
been ever fo fmcere in their intentions for peace, 
and repofed ever fo much confidence in each other, 
it would have been difficult to retain the people in 
tranquillity ; much more, where fuch extreme jea- 
loufy prevailed, and where the court employed every 
pacification as a fnare for their enemies. A plan 
was laid for feizing the perfon of the prince and 
admiral ; who narrowly efcaped to Rochelle, and 
fummoned their partifans to their affiftance ''. The 
civil wars were renewed with greater fury than ever, 
and the parties became flill more exafperated againfl 
each other. The young duke of Anjou, brother to 
the king, com^manded the forces of the catholics ; 
and fought, in 1569, a great battle at Jarnac with 
the hugonots, where the prince of Conde was killed 
and his army defeated. This difcomfiture, with the 
lofs of fo great a leader, reduced not the hugonots 
to defpair. The admiral ftill fupported the caufe ; 
and having placed at the head of the proteftants the 
prince of Navarre, then fixteen years of age, and 
the young prince of Conde, he encouraged the 
party rather to perifh bravely in the field, than ig- 
nominioufly by the hands of the executioner. He 
coilecled fuch numbers, fo determined to endure 
every extremity, that he was enabled to make head 
againft the duke of Anjou ; and being ftrengthened 

q Davila, lib. iv. 

- ' by 



ELIZABETH. 187 

by a new reinforcement of Germans, he obliged that Chap. 
prince to retreat, and to divide his forces. ^^' . 

CoLiGNi then laid fiege to Poitiers ; and as the ,^yj^ 
eyes of all France were fixed on this enterprife, the 
duke of Guife, emulous of the renown which his 
father had acquired by the defence of Metz, threw 
hinifelf into the place, and fo animated the garrifon 
by his valour and conduft, that the admiral was 
obliged to raife the fiege. Such was the commence- 
ment of that unrivalled fame and grandeur afterwards 
attained by this duke of Guife. The attachment 
which all the cathohcs had borne to his father was 
immediately transferred to the fon ; and men pleafed 
themfelves in comparing all the great and iliining 
qualities which feemed in a manner hereditary in 
that family. Equal in affability, in munificence, in 
addrefs, in eloquence, and in every quality which 
engages the affeftions of men ; equal alfo in valour, 
in conduct, in enterprife, in capacity ; there feemed 
only this difference between them, that the fon, 
educated in more turbulent times, and finding a 
greater dilTolution of all law and order, exceeded 
the father in ambition and temerity, and was engaged 
in enterprifes flill more deftruftive to the autho«> 
rity of his fovereign, and to the repofe of his native 
country. 

Elizabeth, who kept her attention fixed on the 
civil commotions of France, was nowife pleafed with 
this new rife of her enemies the Guifes ; and being 
anxious for the fate of the proteftants, whofe in- 
terefts were connefted with her own ', flie was en- 
gaged, notwithflanding her averfion from all rebel- > 
lion, and from all oppofition to the will of the fove- 
reign, to give them fecretly fome affiftance. Be- 
fides employing her authority with the German 
princes, ihe lent money to the queen of Navarre, 

' Haynes, p. 471, 

and 




J57J. 



,83 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

and received fome jewels as pledges for the loan. 
And ihe permitted Henry Champernon to levy, and 
tranfport over into France, a regiment of a hundred 
gentlemen volunteers ; among whom Walter Ra- 
leigh, then a young man, began to diflinguifli him- 
felf in that great fchool of military valour *. The 
admiral, conftrained by the impatience of his' troops, 
and by the difficulty of fubiifling them, fought with 
the duke of Anjou the battle of Moncontour in 
Poiclou, where he was wounded and defeated. The 
court of France, notwithftanding their frequent ex- 
perience of the obHinacy of the hugonots, and the 
vigour of Coligni, vainly flattered themfelves that 
the force of the rebels was at lafl finally annihilated; 
and they neglected farther preparations againfl a foe, 
who, they thought, could never more become dan- 
gerous. They were furprifed to hear that this leader 
had appeared, without difmay, in another quarter of 
the kingdom ; had encouraged the young princes, 
whom he governed, to like conftancy ; had aifenibled 
an army ; had taken the field ; and was even ftrong 
enough to threaten Paris. The public finances, di- 
miniOied by the continued diforders of the kingdom, 
and wafted by fo many fruitlefs military enterprifes, 
could no longer bear the charge of a new armament ; 
and the king, notwithftanding his extreme animofity 
againft the hugonots, was obliged, in 1570, to con- 
clude an accommodation with them, to grant them 
a pardon for all paft ofiences, and to renew the edids 
for liberty of confcience. 

Though a pacification was feemlngiy concluded, 
the mind of Charles was nowife reconciled to his 
rebellious fubjeds ; and this accommodation, like all 
the foregoing, was nothing but a fnare by which 
the perfidious court had projefted to deftroy at once, 
without danger, all its formidable enemies, As the 

* Camden, p. 4.23'. 

two 



1S71- 



ELIZABETH. l^ 

two young princes, the admiral, and the other chap. 
leaders of the hugonots, inftrucled by paft expe- ^ ^^ 
rience, difcovered an extreme diflrufl of the king's 
intentions, and kept themfelves in fecurity at a 
diilance, all polfiblc artifices were employed to re- 
move their apprehenfions, and to convince them of 
the fmcerity of the new counfels which feemed to be 
embraced. The term.s of the peace were religioufly 
obferved to them ; the toleration was jflridly main- 
tained ; all attempts made by the zealous catholics 
to infringe it were punillied with feverity ; offices, 
and favours, and honours, were beftowed on the 
principal nobility among the proteftants ; and the 
king and council every where declared, that, tired 
of civil diforders, and convinced of the impoffibility 
of forcing men's confciences, they were thenceforth 
determined to allow every one the free exercife of 
his religion. 

Among the other artifices employed to lull the 
proteftants into a fatal fecurity, Charles affected to 
enter into clofe connexion with Elizabeth ; and as 
it feemed not the iiitereft of France to forward the 
union of the two kingdoms of Great Britain, that 
princefs the more eafily flattered herfelf that the 
French monarch would prefer her fricndfliip to that 
of the queen of Scots. The better to deceive her, 
propofals of marriage were made her with the duke 
of Anjou ; a prince whofe youth, beauty, and re- 
putation for valour might naturally be fuppofed t» 
recommend him to a woman who had appeared not 
altogether infenfible to thefe endowments. The 
queen immediately founded on this offer the projed: 
of deceiving the court of Fran<:e ; and being intent 
on that artifice, fhe laid herfelf the m.ore open- to 
be deceived. Negotiations were entered into- with 
regard to the marriage ; terms of the contract were 
propofed ; difficulties itarted and removed -, and the 
two courts, equally infmcere, though not equally 
culpable, feemed to approach every day nearer to 

each 




ipo HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

each other in their demands and conceflions. The 
great obfcacle feemed to lie in adjufting the dif- 
j^^._ ference of religion; becaufe EHzabeth, who recom- 
mended toleration to Charles, Was determined not 
to grant it in her ownf dominions, not even to her 
hufband ; and the duke of Anjou feemed unwilling 
to fubmit, for the fake of interefl, to the dilhonour 
of an apoftacy '. 

The artificial politics of Elizabeth never tri- 
umphed fo much in any contrivances as in thofe 
which were conjoined v/ith her coquetry ; and as her 
character in this particular was generally known, 
the court of France thought that they might, with- 
out danger of forming any final conclufion, venture 
the farther in their conceffions and offers to her* 
The queen alfo had other motives for diffimulation. 
Befides the advantage of difcouraging Mary's par- 
tifans, by the profped of an aUiance betv/een France 
and England, her fituation with Philip demanded 
her utmofl vigilance and attention ; and the violent 
authority eftablifhed in the Low Countries, made hef 
defirous of fortifying herfelf even with the bare ap- 
pearance of a new confederacy. 
Affairs of The theological controverfies which had long 
agitated Europe had, from the beginning, pene- 
trated into the Low Countries ; and as thefe pro- 
vinces maintained an extenfive commerce, they had 
early received from every kingdom with which they 
correfponded, a tinfture of religious innovation. 
An opinion at that time prevailed, which had been 
zealoufly propagated by priefts, and imphcitly' re- 
ceived by fovereigns, that herefy was clolely con- 
nected with rebellion, and that every great or vio- 
lent alteration in the church involved a like revolu- 
tion in the civil government. The forward zeal of 
the reformers would feldom allow them to wait the 
confent of the magiftrate to their innovations : They 

t Camden, p. 4.33. Davila, lib. v. Digges's Complete Ambaf- 
fador, p, 84. 210, III. 

became 



the Low 
Count! ie 



ELIZABETH. 19! 

became lefs dutiful when oppofed and punirtied : chap. 
And though their pretended fpirit of reafoning and yJ^lLj 
inquiry was, in reah'ty, nothing but a new fpecies ,^7,. 
of imphcit fiiith, the prince took the alarm, as if no 
inftitutions could be fecure from the temerity of 
their refearches. The emperor Charles, who pro- 
pofed to augment his authority, under pretence of 
defending the catholic faith, eafily adopted thefe 
political principles ; and notwithftanding the limited 
prerogative which he poirelfed in the Netherlands, 
he publiflied the mod arbitrary, fevere, and tyran- 
nical edicts againfl the proteilants ; and he took care 
that the execution of them (hould be no lefs violent 
and fanguinary. He was neither cruel nor bigoted in 
his natural difpofition ; yet an hiftorian, celebrated 
for moderation and caution, has computed, that in the 
feveral perfecutions promoted by that monarch, no 
lefs than a hundred thoufand perfons periflied by the 
hands of the executioner ". But thefe fevere reme- 
dies, far from anfwering the purpofes intended, had 
father ferved to augment the numbers as well as 
zeal of the reformers ; and the maglftrates of the 
feveral towns, feeing no end of thofe barbarous exe- 
cutions, felt their humanity rebel againfl: their prin- 
ciples, and declined any farther perfecution of the 
new do<:trines. 

When Philip fucceeded to his father *s dominions, 
the Flemings were jufhly alarmed with nev/ appre- 
henfions ; left their prince, obferving the lenity of 
the maglftrates, fhould take the execution of the 
edifts from fuch remifs hands, and fhould eftablifh 
the inquifition in the Low Countries, accompanied 
with all the iniquities and barbarities which attended 
it in Spain. The fevere and unrelenting character 
of the man, his profefted attachment to Spanifh 
manners, the inflexible bigotry of his principles ; all 

" Giotii Anna!, lib. i. Fatlier Paul, another jre^it authority, com- 
putes in a paffige above ciied, thut fiity ihoiiland peiibns were {)ut to 
dea(h in the Low Coiintties alone. 

thefe 



ipz 



HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 




thefe circumflances increafed their terror : And 
when he departed the Netherlands, with a known 
intention never to return, the difgufl of the inhabit- 
ants was extremely augmented, and their dread of 
thofe tyrannical orders which their fovereign, fur- 
rounded with Spanifli minifters, would iifue from his 
cabinet at Madrid. He left the duchefs of Parma 
, governefs of the Low Countries ; and the plain good 
fenfe and good temper of that princefs, had fhe 
been entrulled with the fole power, would have pre- 
ferved the fubmiflion of thofe opulent provinces, 
which were loft from that refinement of treacherous 
and barbarous politics on which Philip fo highly 
valued himfelf. The Flemings found, that the 
name alone of regent remained with the duchefs ; 
that cardinal Granville entirely pofleifed the king's 
confidence; that attempts were every day made on 
their liberties ; that a refolution was taken never 
more to afl'emble the ftates ; that new bifhoprics 
were arbitrarily erected, in order to enforce the exe- 
cution of the perfecuting edicts ; and that, on the 
whole, they muil expe6l to be reduced to the 
condition of a province under the Spanifh monarchy. 
The difcontents of the nobility gave countenance to 
the complaints of the gentry, which, encouraged the 
mutiny of the populace ; and all orders of men 
fhewed a ftrong difpofition to revolt. Aflbciations 
were formed, tumultuary petitions prefented, names 
of diftinction alTumed, badges of party difplayed ; 
and the current of the people, impelled by religious 
zeal and irritated by feeble refiftance, rofe to fuch a 
height, that in feveral towns, particularly in Ant- 
werp, they made an open invafion on the eftablifhed 
worfliip, pillaged the churches and monafteries, 
broke the images, and committed the moft unwar- 
rantable diforders. 

The wifer part of the nobility, particularly the 
prince of Orange, and the counts Egmont and 
Horn, were alarmed at thefe excelTes, to which 

their 



ELIZABETH. 



193 



their own difcontents had at firft given countenance; CHAP, 
and feconding the wifdom of the governefs, they ^^l,^ 
lupprefled the dangerous mfurreftions, punifhed the j^^i, ' 
ringleaders, and reduced all the provinces to a flate 
of order and fubmiffion. But Philip vi^as not con- 
tented with the re-eftablifh merit of his ancient au- 
thority : He confidered, that provinces fo remote 
from the feat of government could not be ruled by 
a limited prerogative ; and that a prince, who muu; 
mtreat rather than command, would neceflfarily, 
when he refided not among the people, feel every 
day a diminution of his power and influence. He 
determined, therefore, to lay hold of the late po- 
pular diforders, as a pretence for entirely abolifliing 
the privileges of the Low Country provinces ; and for 
ruling them thenceforth with a military and arbitrary 
authority. 

In the execution of this violent defign, he em- 
jployed a man, who was a proper inftrument in the 
hands of fuch a tyrant. Ferdinand of Toledo, duke 
of Alva, had been educated amidfl; arms ; and hav- 
ing attained a confummate knowledge in the military 
art, his habits led him to transfer into all government 
the fevere difcipline of a camp, and to conceive no 
meafures between prince and fubject, but thofe of 
rigid command and implicit obedience. This ge- 
neral, in 1568, conduced from Italy to the Low 
Countries a powerful body of veteran Spaniards; and 
his avowed aniraofity to the Flemings, with his 
known chara6ler,fl:ruck that whole people with terror 
and confternarion. It belongs not to our fabject to 
relate at length thofe violences which Alva's natural 
barbarity, (leeled by refleftion, and aggravated by 
infolence, exercifed on thofe flouriOiing provinces. 
It fuffices to fay, that all their privileges, the gift 
of fo rriany princes, and the inheritance of fo many 
ages, were openly and exprefsly abolifhed by edift ; 
arbitrary and fanguinary tribunals erefted ; the counts 
Egmont and Horn, in fpite of their great merits and 

Vol. V. O paft 



T94 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, paft fervices, brought to the fcaffold ; multitudes of 

'*^^* all ranks thrown into confinement, and thence de- 

,^7,, livered over to the executioner : And notwithfland- 

ing the peaceable fubmiffion of all men, nothing 

was heard of but confifcation, imprifonment, exile^ 

torture, and death. 

Elizabeth was equally difpleafed to fee the pro- 
grefs of that fcheme, laid for the extermination of 
the proteflants, and to obferve the ereftion of fo 
great a military power, in a ftate fituated in fo near 
a neighbourhood. She gave protection to all the 
Flemifii exiles who took ilielter in her dominions j 
and as many of thefe were the mod indullrious in- 
habitants of the Netherlands, and had rendered that 
country celebrated for its arts, fhe reaped the ad- 
vantage of introducing into England fome ufeful 
manufa<5lures, which were formerly unknown in that 
kingdom. Forefeeing that the violent government 
of Alva could not long fubfift without exciting fome 
commotion, fhe ventured to commit an infult upon 
him, which ihe would have been cautious not to 
hazard againfl a more eftablifhed authority. Some 
Genoefe merchants had engaged, by contract with 
Philip, to tranfport into Flanders the fum of four 
hundred thoufand crowns ; and the veflels, on which 
this money was embarked, had been attacked in the 
Channel by fome privateers equipped by the French 
hugonots, and had taken fhelter in Plymouth and 
Southampton. The commanders of the fliips pre- 
tended that the money belonged to the king of 
Spain J but the queen, finding upon inquiry that 
it was the property of Genoefe merchants, took 
poffellion of it as a loan ; and by that means de- 
prived the duke of Alva of this refource in the time 
of his greatefl neceffity, Alva, in revenge, feized 
all the Englifh merchants in the Low Countries, 
threw them into prifon, and confifcated their effeds. 
The queen retaliated by a like violence on the 
Flemilh and Spanifh merchants j and gave all the 

Englilb 



ELIZABETH. ip^ 

JEnglllli liberty to make reprifals on the fubje(5ls of C H a p. 

Philip. ^ ^ vJlX> 

These differences were afterwards accommodated ,^71 ■ 
by treaty, and mutual reparations were made to the 
merchants : But nothing could repair the lofs which 
fo vi^ell-timed a blow inflitled on the Spanifii govern- 
ment in the Low Countries. Alva, in want of money, 
and dreading the immediate mutiny of his troops, to 
whom great arrears were due, impofed by his arbi- 
trary will the moit ruinous taxes on the people. He 
not only required the hundredth penny, and the 
twentieth of all imtnoveable goods : He alfo de- 
manded the tenth of all moveable goods on every 
fale ; an abfurd tyranny, which would not only have 
deftroyed all arts and commerce, but even have re- 
ftrained the common intercoiirfe of life. The people 
refufed comphance : The duke had recourfe to his 
ufual expedient of the gibbet : And thus matters 
came fliil nearer the laft extremities between the 
Flemings and the Spaniards '"'. 

'All the enemies of Elizabeth, in order to re- 
venge themfelves for her infults, had naturally re- 
courfe to one policy, the fupporting of the caufe 
and pretenfions of the queen of Scots ; and Alva, 
whofe meafures were ever violent, foon opened a 
fecret Intercourfe with that princefs. There was one 
Rodolphi, a Florentine merchant, who had refided 
about fifteen years in London, and who, while he 
conduced his commerce in England, had managed 
all the correfpondence of the court of Rome with 
the catholic nobihty and gentry". He had been New con- 
thrown into prifon at the time when the duke of ^^>"■^<:y of 
Norfolk's intrigues with Mary had been difcovered j l'J•^^?o^.'!* 
but either no proof was found againft him, or the folk. 
part which he had adled was not very criminal ', and 

^ Rentivoglio, part I. lib. v. Camden, p. 416, 
^ Lefley, p. 123. State Trials, vol. i. p. 87. 

O2 he 



i5>6 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, he foon after recovered his liberty. This man, 
^^^..J,^ zealous for the catholic faith, had formed a fcheme^ 
1571. in concert with the Spanifh ambaffador, for fub vert- 
ing the government, by a foreign invafion and a 
domeftic infurreftion ; and when he communicated 
his projeft, by letter, to Mary, he found that, as fhc 
was now fully convinced of Elizabeth's artifices, and 
defpaired of ever recovering her authority, or even 
her liberty, by pacific meafures, (he willingly gave 
her concurrence. The great number of difcontented. 
catholics were the chief fource of their hopes on the 
fide of England ; and they alfo obferved, that the 
kingdom was, at that time, full of indigent gentry 
chiefly younger brothers, who having at prefent, by 
the late decay of the church, and the yet languifh- 
ing ftate of commerce, no profpeft of a livelihood 
fuitable to their birth, were ready to throw them- 
felves into any defperate enterprife ^. But in order 
to infpire life and courage into all thefe malcontents, 
it was requifite that fome great nobleman fhould 
put himfelf at their head ; and no one appeared to 
Rodolphi, and to the biihop of Rofs, who entered 
into all thefe intrigues, fo proper, both on account 
of his power and his popularity, as the duke of 
Norfolk. 

This nobleman, when releafed from confinement 
in the Tower, had given his promife, that he would 
drop all intercourfe with the queen of Scots "^ ; but 
finding that he had loft, and, as he feared, beyond 
recovery, the confidence and favour of Elizabeth, 
and being ftill, in fome degree, reftrained from his 
liberty, he was tempted, by impatience and defpair, 
to violate his word, and to open anew his cor- 
refpondence with the captive princefs '. A pro- 
mife of marriage was renewed between them ; the 
duke engaged to enter into all her interefts j and 

y Lefley, p. 123. * Haynes, p. 571., 

^ State Trials, vol. i. p. 102. 

as 



ELIZABETH. 



15^7 



as his remorfes gradually diminiflied in the courfe CHAP. 
of thefe tranfa<5lions, he was pufhed to give his ^^' 
confent to enterprifes (till more criminal. Rodol- ,„j. 
phi's plan was, that the duke of Alva fhould, on 
fome other pretence, affemble a great quantity of 
fhipping in the Low Countries ; Ihould tranfport a 
body of fix thoufand foot, and four thoufand horfe, 
into England ; fhould land them at Harwich, where 
the duke of Norfolk was to join them with all his 
friends ; fliould thence march diredly to London, 
and oblige the queen to fubmit to whatever terms 
the confpirators (hould pleafe to impofe upon her ^ 
Norfolk exprefled his aflent to this plan ; and three 
letters, in confgquence of it, were written in his 
name by Rodolphi, one to Alva, another to the 
pope, and a third to the king of Spain ; but the 
duke, apprehenfive of the danger, refufed to fign 
them ". He only fent to the Spanifli ambaffador a 
fervant and confident, named Barker, as well to no- 
tify his concurrence in the plan, as to vouch for the 
authenticity of thefe letters ; and Rodolphi, having 
obtained a letter of credence from the ambaffador, 
proceeded on his journey to Bruffels and to Rome. 
The duke of Alva and the pope embraced the fcheme 
with alacrity : Rodolphi informed Norfolk of their 
intentions ^ ; and every thing feemed to concur ii^ 
forwarding the undertaking. 

Norfolk, notwithflanding thefe criminal enter- 
prifes, had never entirely forgotten his duty to his 
fovereign, his country, and his religion ; and though 
he had laid the plan both of an invafion and an in- 
furredion, he ftill flattered himfelf, that the inno- 
cence of his intentions would juftify the violence of 
his meafures, and that, as he aimed at nothing but 
the liberty of the queen of Scots, and the obtaining 

*> Lefley, p. 155. State Trials, vol. i. p. 86, 87. c Lefleyi 

P.* *S9« »^i« Camden, p. 432. '* State Trials, vol. i. p. 93. 

9 3 o( 



19^ HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, of Elizabeth's confent to his marriage, he could not 
,^^^^^1^^ j^ftly reproach himfelf as a rebel and a traitor % It 
1 571. is certain, however, that, confidering the queen's 
vigour and fpirit, the fcheme, if fuccefsful, muil 
finally have ended in dethroning her ; and her au- 
thority was here expofed to the utmoft danger. 

The confpiracy hitherto had entirely efcaped the 
vigilance of Elizabeth, and that of fecretary Cecil, 
who now bore the title of lord Burleigh. It was 
from another attempt of Norfolk's, that they firft 
obtained a hint, which, being diligently traced, led 
at lafl to a full difcovery. Mary had intended to 
fend a fum of money to lord Herries, and her par- 
tifans in Scotland ; and Norfolk undertook to have 
it delivered to Bannifter, a fervant of his, at that 
time in the North, who was to find fome expedient 
for conveying it to lord Herries ^ He entrufted 
the money to a fervant who was not in the fecret, 
and told him that the bag contained a fum of mo- 
ney in filver, which he was to deliver to Bannifter 
with a letter : But the fervant conjecturing, from 
the weight and fize of the bag, that it was full of 
gold, carried the letter to Burleigh; who imme- 
diately ordered Bannifter, Barker, and Hicford, the 
duke's fecretary, to be put under arreft, and to un- 
dergo a fevere examination. Torture made them 
confefs the whole truth ; and as Hicford, though 
ordered to burn all papers, had carefully kept them 
concealed under the mats of the duke's chamber, 
and under the tiles of the houfe, full evidence nov/ 
appeared againft his mafter^. Norfolk himfelf, 
who was entirely ignorant of the difcoveries made 
by his fervants, was brought before the council ; 
and though exhorted to atone for his guilt by a full 
confeftion, he perfifted in denying every crime, with 

« Lefley, p. 155. ' I'.iid. p. 169. State Trials, 

▼ol. i. p. 87. Camden, p. 434- Digges, p. 13+. 137.14.0. Stiype, 
vol, ii. p. 8z, 8 Leilcy, p. 173, 

vvhicl^ 



ELIZABETH. 199 

which he was charged. *rhe queen always declared, chap. 
that, if he had given her this proof of his fincere ^^J!^2,^ 
repentance, fhe would have pardoned all his former ,37,. 
offences *" ; but finding hjm obftinate, fhe com- 
mitted him to the Tower, and ordered him to be 
brought to his trial. The bifhop of Rofs had, on 
ibme fufpicion, been committed to cuflody before 
the difcovery of Norfolk's guilt ; and every expe- 
dient was employed to make him reveal his fhare 
in the confpiracy. He at firft infifled on his privi- 
lege ; but he was told, that as his miflrefs was no 
longer a fovereign, he would not be regarded as an 
ambafTador, and that, even if that charafter were 
allowed, it did not warrant him in confpiring againll 
the fovereign at whofe court he refided'. As he 
flill refufed to anfwer interrogatories, he was in- 
formed of the confefhon made by Norfolk's fer- 
vants, after which he no longer fcrupled to make 
a full difcovery ; and his evidence put the guilt 
of that nobleman beyond all queflion. A jury of »57i. 
twenty-five peers unanimoufly paffed fentence upon xHai of* 
}iim. The trial was quite regular, even according Norfolk, 
to the lirid: rules obferved at prefent in thefe mat- 
ters ; except that the witnelTes gave not their evi- 
dence in court, and were not confronted with the 
prifoner : A laudable pradice, which was not at 
that time obferved in trials for high treafon. 

The queen flill hefitated concerning Norfolk's 
execution, whether that fhe was really moved by 
friendfhip and compalfion towards a peer of that 
rank and merit, or that, affe(^ing the praife of 
clemency, fiie only put on the appearance of thefe 
fentiments. Twice fire figned a warrant for his 
execution, and twice revoked the fatal fentence ^ ; 
^nd though her miniflers and counfellors pufhed her 

^ Lefley, p. 175. » Ibid. p. 189. Spotfwood. 

*: Carte, p, 527. from Fenelon's Difpatches, Diggcs, p. 166. 
Strype, vol. ii. p. 83. 

P 4 tQ 



200 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, to rigour, fhe flill appeared irrefolute and undeter- 
^^^^J^^J,^^ mined. After four months hefitation, a parliament 
1572. was aflembled, and the commons addreffed her, in 
His execu- ftroug tcrms, for the execution of the duke ; a fanc- 
sThMay. ^ion which, when added to the greatnefs and cer- 
tainty of his guilt, would, fhe thought, juftify, in 
the eyes of all mankind, her feverity againfl that 
ad June, nobleman. Norfolk died with calmnefs and con-^ 
ftancy : and though he cleared himfelf of any dif- 
loyal mtentions againft the queen's authority, he 
acknowledged the juflice of the fentence by which 
he fuffered'. That we may relate together affairs 
of a fmiilar nature, we fhall mention, that the earl 
of Northumberland, being delivered up to the 
queen by the regent of Scotland, was alfo, a 
few months after, brought to the fcaffbld for his 
rebellion. 

The queen of Scots was either the occafion or 
the caufe of all thefe diflurbances ; but as fhe was 
a fovereign princefs, and might reafonably, from the 
harfh treatment which fhe had met with, think her- 
felf entitled to ufe any expedient for her relief, Eli- 
zabeth durfl not, as yet, form any refolution of pro- 
ceeding to extremities againfl her. She only fent 
lord Delawar, fir Ralph Sadler, fir Thomas Brom- 
ley, and Dr. Wilfon, to cxpoflulate with her, and 
to demand fatisfaclion for all thofe parts of her con- 
diift which, from the beginning of her hfe, had 
given difpleafure to Elizabeth : Her aifuming the 
arms of England, refufing to ratify the treaty of 
Edinburgh, intending to marry Norfolk without 
the queen's confent, concurring in the northern re- 
bellion", pradifing with Rodolphi to engage the 
king of Spain in an invafion of England", pro- 
. curing the pope's bull of excommunication, and al- 

I Camden, p. 44.0. Strype, vol. ii. App, p. 23. •" Diggss, 

p. 16.. 107. Strype, vol. ii. p. 51, 52. " Ibid. p. 194.. 

f:Oif S09, Stiypc, vol. ii. p. 40. 51. 

lowing 



ELIZABETH. 2oj 

lowing her friends abroad to give her the title of C H a p. 
queen of England. Mary juftified herfelf from the "^^IL- 
feveral articles of the charge, either by denying the ; 

fa£ts imputed to her, or by throwing the blame on 
others °. But the queen was little fatisfied with her 
apology, and the parliament was fo enraged againfl 
her, that the commons made a direft application 
for her immediate trial and execution. They em- 
ployed fome topics derived from practice and rea- 
fon, and the laws of nations ; but the chief flrefs was 
laid on paffages and examples from the Old Tefla- 
ment^, which, if confidered as a general rule of 
conduct (an intention which it is unreafonable to 
fuppofe), would lead to confequences deflruftive of 
all principles of humanity and morality. Matters 
were here carried farther than Elizabeth intended j 
and that princefs, fatisfied ,with fliewing Mary the 
difpofition of the nation, fent to the houfe her ex- 
prefs commands not to deal any farther at prefent 
in the affair of the Scottifh queen ^. Nothing could 
be a ftronger proof, that the puritanical intereft 
prevailed in the houfe, than the intemperate ufe of 
authorities derived from fcripture, efpecially from 
the Old Teftament ; and the queen was fo httle a 
lover of that fed:, that fhe was not likely to make 
any conceflion merely in deference to their folicit- 
ation. She lliewed, this feffion, her difapprobatioii 
of their fc hemes in another remarkable inltance. 
The commons had paifed two bills for regulating 
tcclefiaflical ceremonies ; but fhe fent them a like 
imperious meifage with her former ones j and by 
the terror of her prerogative, Ihe flopped all farther 
proceeding in thofe matters ■". 
• But though Elizabeth would not carry matters 
to fuch extremities againfl: Mary, as were recom- 
jnended by the parliament, fhe wa^ alarmed at the 



« Camden, p. 44.2. P D'Ewes, p. 207, 208, &c. 

^ Ibid. p. 219. 24.1, r Ibid, p. 213. 238. 



great 



affair 



202 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

C HA P. great IntereH: and the reUIefs fpirit of that piincefs, 
^J^^^L, as well as her clofe connexions with Spain ; and 
x^yz. ftie thought it neceflary both to increafe the rigour 
and ftridnefs of her confinement, and to foUo\y 
maxims diHerent from thofe which llie had hitherto 
Scotch purfued in her management of Scotland'. That 
kingdom rcnuained ftili in a ftate of anarchy. The 
eaftle of Edinburgh, commanded by Kirkaldy of 
Grange, had declared for Pvlary ; and the lords of 
that party, encouraged by his countenance, had 
taken poffefiion of the capital, and carried on a 
vigorous war againflthe regent. By a fudden and 
unexpeded inroad, they leized that nobleman at 
Stirling ; but finding that his friends, fallying from 
the caftle, were likely to refcue him, they inllantly 
put him to death. The earl of Marre was chofeii 
regent in his room ; and found the fame difficulties 
in the government of tbi^t divided country. He 
was therefore glad to accept of the mediation offered 
by the French and Englifli ambaifadors j and to 
conclude on equal terms a truce with the queen's 
party \ He was a man of a free and generous 
fpirit, and fcorned to fubmit to any dependance on 
England ; and for this reafon, Elizabeth, who had 
then formed intimate connexions with France, 
yielded with lefs reluctance to the foHcitations of that 
court, flill maintained the appearance of neutrality 
between the parties, and allowed matters to remain 
en a balance in Scotland". But affairs foon after 
took a new turn : Marre died of melancholy, witli 
which the diftraXed (late of the country affeXed 
him : Morton was chofen regent ; and as this no- 
bleman had fecretly taken all his meafures with 
Elizabeth, vv^ho no longer relied on the friendfliip 
of the French court, (lie refolved to exert herfelf 
more effeduaily for the fupport of the party which 

s Digges, p. 152. * Spotfwood, p, 263. 

■" Diggf-s, p. ij6. 165. 169. 

/he 



ELIZABETH. 203 

ihe had always favoured. She fent fir Plenry Kil- chap. 
iegrew ambaiTador to Scotland, who found Mary's '^^V- 
partifans fo difeouraged by the difcovery and pu- j.^^^ 
nifhment of Norfolk'? confpiracy, that they w-ere 
glad to fubmit to the king's authority, and accept 
of an indemnity from all pad offences "". The duke 
of Chatelrault and the earl of Huntley, with the 
moft confiderable of Mary's friends, laid down their 
arms on theie conditions. The garrifon alone of 
the caftle of Edinburgh continued refradfory. Kir- 
kaldy's fortunes were defperate ; and he flattered 
himielf with the hopes of receiving afliflance from 
the kings of France and Spain, v/ho encouraged 
his obftinacy, in the view of being able, from that 
quarter, to give difturbance to England. Elizabeth 
was alarmed with the danger ; (he no more appre- 
hended making an entire breach with the queen of 
Scots, who, Ihe found, would not any longer be 
amufed by her artifices ; fhe had an implicit re- 
liance on Morton ; and fhe faw that by the fub- 
mifTion of all the confiderable nobility, the pacifi- 
cation of Scotland would be an eafy, as well as a 
moll important undertaking. She ordered, there- 
fore, fir William Drury, governor of Berwic, to 
jnarch with fome troops and artillery to Edinburgh, 
and to befiege the caftle ^. The garrifon furrendcred 
at dil'cretion : Kirkaldy was delivered into the hands 
of his countrymen, by whom he was tried, con- 
demned, and executed : Secretary Lidington, who 
had taken part with him, died foon after a volun- 
tary death, as is fuppofed j and Scotland, fubmitting 
entirely to the regent, gave not, during a long 
time, any further inquietude to Elizabeth. 

The events which happened in France were not French 
fo agreeable to the queen/s interefts and inclinations. aft.iua. 
The fallacious pacifications, which had been fo often 
inade with the hugonots, gave them r'feaion to fufped 

* Spotfwood, p. s6S, >■ Camdn, p. 449- 

the 



2(04 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, the prefent intentions of the court ; and, after all 
^J^^^lf the other leaders of that party were deceived into a 
JZJ2, dangerous credulity, the fagacious admiral ftill re- 
mained doubtful and uncertain. But his fufpicions 
were at lad overcome^ partly by the profound diffi- 
niulation of Charles, partly by his own earnefl defire 
to end the miferies of France, and return again to 
the performance of his duty towards his prince and 
country. He confidered befides, that as the former 
violent conduft of the court had ever met with fuch 
fatal fuccefs, it was not unlikely, that a prince, who 
had newly come to years of difcretion, and appeared 
riot to be rivetted in any dangerous animofities or 
prejudices, would be induced to govern himfelf by 
more moderate maxims. And as Charles was young, 
was of a paffionate, hafty temper, and addided to 
pleafure^, fuch deep perfidy feemed either remote 
from his character, or difficult, and almoft imppf- 
fible, to be fo uniformly fupported by him. Moved 
by thefe confiderations, the admiral, the queen of 
Navarre, and all the hugonots, began to repofe 
themfelves in full fecurity, and gave credit to the 
treacherous carefles and profeffions of the French 
court. Elizabeth herfelf, notwithftanding her great 
experience and penetration, entertained not the leafl 
diitrufc of Charles's fnicerity ; and being pleafed to 
find her enemies of the houfe of Guife removed 
from all authority, and to obferve an animofity every 
day growing between the French and Spanifli mo- 
TithApr. narchs, fhe concluded a defenfive league with the 
former % and regarded this alliance as an invincible 
barrier to her throne. Walfmgham, her ambaffador, 
fent her over, by every courier, the moft fatisfadory 
accounts of the honour, and plain-dealing, and fide- 
lity of that perfidious prince. 

The better to blind the jealous hugonots, and 
dravNT their leaders into the fnare prepared for them, 

^ Digges, p. 8. 35, " Camden, p, 443. 

1 5 Charles 



ELIZABETH. 205 

Cliarles offered his fifter, Margaret, in marriage to chap. 
the prince of Navarre ; and the admiral, with all ^i^^^l- 
the confiderable nobility of the party, had come to ,^yj, 
Paris, in order to aflift at the celebration of thefe 
nuptials, which, it was hoped, would finally, if not 
compofe the differences, at leaft appeafe the bloody 
animofity of the two religions. The queen of Na- 
varre was poifoned by orders from the court ; the 
admiral was dangeroufly wounded by an affaffm : 
Yet Charles, redoubling his diffimulation, was ftill 
able to retain the hugonots in their fecurity ; till, -4-tli Ai^. 
on the evening of St. Bartholomew, a few days after 
the marriage, the fignal was given for a general 
maffacre of thofe religioniits, and the king himfelf, 
in perfon, led the way to thefe affaffinations. The MafTacn? 
hatred long entertained by the Parifians againfl the ^^ ^^*"*** 
proteftants, made them fecond, without any prepa- 
ration, the fury of the court ; and perfons of every 
condition, age, and fex, fufpected of any propenfity 
to that religion, were involved in an undiftinguiihed 
ruin. The admiral, his fon-in-law, Teligni, Soubize, 
Rochefoucault, Pardaillon, Piles, Lavardin, men 
%vho, during the late wars, had fignalized them- 
felves by the mod heroic aftions, were miferabiy 
butchered, without refiftance ; the ftreets of Paris 
flowed with blood ; and the people, more enraged 
than fatiated with their cruelty, as if repining that 
death had faved the viftims from farther infult, ex- 
ercifed on their dead bodies ail the rage of the mo{l 
licentious brutality. About five hundred gentlemen 
and men of rank perifhed in this maffacre, and near 
ten thoufand of inferior condition ^ Orders were 
inftantly difpatched to all the provinces for a like 
general execution of the proteftants ; and in Rouen, 
Lyons, and miany other cities, the people emulated 
the fury of the capital. Even the murder of the 
king of Navarre, and prince of Conde, had been 

'" Davils, lib. V, 

. propofed 



1572. 



2o6 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, propofed by the duke of Guife ; but Charlei^ 
-^^* foftened by the amiable manners of the king of 
Navarre, and hoping that thefe young princes might 
eafily be converted to the cathohc faith, determined 
to fpare their Hves, though he obliged them to 
purchafe their fafety by a feeming change of their 
religion. 

Charles, in order to cover this barbarous per- 
fidy, pretended that a confpiracy of the hugonots to 
feize his perfon had been fuddenly detedled ; and 
that he had been necefiitated, for his own defence, 
to proceed to this feverity againft thern. He fent 
orders to, Feneion, his ambaffador in England, to 
alii an audience, and to give Elizabeth this account 
of the late tranfa<ll:ion. That minifler, a man of 
probity, abhorred the treachery and cruelty of his 
court ; and even fcrupled not to declare, that he 
was now afhamed to bear the name of Frenchman " ; 
yet he was obliged to obey his orders, and make ufe 
of the apology which had heen prefcribed to him. 
He met with that reception from ail the courtiers^ 
which, he knew, the condud of his mafler had fo 
well merited. Nothing could be more awful and af- 
fecting than the folemnity of his audience A me- 
lancholy forrow fat on every face ; Silence, as In the 
dead of night, reigned through all the chambers of 
the royal apartment j the courtiers and ladies, clad 
in deep mourning, were ranged on each fide, and 
allowed him to pafs, without affording him one fa- 
lute or favourable look ; till he was admitted to the 
queen herfelf ^ That princefs received him with a 
more eafy, if not a more gracious countenance; 
and heard his apology, without difcovering any vi- 
fible fymptoms of indignation. She then told him, 
that though, on the firit rumour of this dreadful 
intelligence, (lie had been aftonifhed that fo many 
brave men and loyal fubjefts, who refted fecure oii 

<: Digues, p. 247. 

^ Cane, vol, iii. p. 51*. from Fenelon's Difpatches. 

I O tht 




»572- 



E L I Z A B E T H. 207 

the faith of their fovereign, (hould have been fud- 
denly butchered in fo barbarous a manner, fhe had 
hitherto fufpended her judgment, till farther and 
more certain information fliould be brought her : 
That the account which he had given, even if founded 
on no miftake or bad information, though it might 
alleviate, would by no means remove the blame of 
the king's counfellors, or juftify the ftrange irregu- 
larity of their proceedings : That the fame force 
which, without refiftance, had maffacred fo many de- 
fencclefs men, could eafily have fecured their perfons, 
and have refer ved them for a trial, and for punifhment 
by a legal fentence, which would have diflinguifhed 
the innocent from the guilty : That the admiral, in. 
particular, being dangerouily wounded, and environed 
by the guards of the king, on whofe protection he 
feemed entirely to rely, had no means of efcape, and 
might furely, before his death, have been convifted 
of the crimes imputed to him : That it was more 
worthy of a fovereign to referve in his own hands 
the fword of juftice, than to commit it to bloody- 
murderers, who, being the declared and mortal ene- 
mies of the perfons accufed, employed it without mer- 
cy and without diftinftion : That if thefe fentiments 
were juft, even fuppofmg the confpiracy of the protefl- 
ants to be real, how much more fo, if that crime was 
a calumny of their enemies, invented for their deftruc- 
tion ? That if, upon enquiry, the innocence of thefe 
unhappy vidims fhould afterwards appear, it was the 
king's duty to turn his vengeance on their defamers, 
who had thus cruelly abufed his confidence, had mur- 
dered fo many of his brave fubjefts, and had done 
what in them lay to cover him with everlafting dif- 
honour : And that for her pa'rt, flie (hould form her 
judgment of his intentions by his fubfequent con- 
du6t ; and in the mean time fhould a6t as defired by 
the ambaffador, and rather pity than blame his mafter 
for the extremities to which he had been carried % 

e Diggcs, p. 247, 348. 

ElizabetiI 




HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

Elizabeth was fully fenfible of the dangerous 
fituation in which fhe now flood. In the malTacre o^ 
"1572^ Paris, fhe faw the refult of that general confpiracy^ 
formed for the extermination of the proteftants ; and 
flie knew that fhe herfelf, as the head and prote£lrefs 
of the new religion, was expofed to the utmoft fury 
and refentment of the catholics* The violence and 
cruelty of the Spaniards in the Low Countries was 
another branch of the fame confpiracy ; and as Charles 
and Philip, two princes nearly allied in perfidy and 
barbarity as well as in bigotry, had now laid afide 
their pretended quarrel, and had avowed the mofl 
entire friendfhip \ fhe had reafon, as foon as they had 
appeafed their domeftic commotions, to dread the 
effedls of their united counfels. The duke of Guife 
alfo and his family, whom Charles, in order to deceive 
the admiral, had hitherto kept at a diftance, had now 
acquired an open and entire afcendant in the court of 
France ; and fhe was fenfible that thefe princes, froni 
perfonal as well as political reafons, were her declared 
and implacable enemies^ The queen of Scots, their 
near relation and clofe confederate, was the pretender 
to her throne ; and, though detained in cuftody, was 
actuated by a refllefs fpirit, and, befides her foreign 
allies, pofTeffed numerous and zealous partifans in the 
heart of the kingdom. For thefe reafons, Eliz^abeth 
thought it more prudent not to rejeft all commerce 
with the French monarch, but flill to liflen to the 
profeflions of friendfhip which he made her. She 
allowed even the negotiations to be renewed for her 
marriage with the duke of Alen^on, Charles's third 
brother ^ : Thofe with the duke of Anjou had already 
been broken off. She fent the earl of Worcefler tO' 
affift in her name at the baptifm of a young princefs', 
born to Charles ; but before fhe agreed to give him 
this lafl mark of condefcenfion, fhe thought it be- 
coming her dignity, to renew her exprefTions of 

f Digges, p. 262. 282. 5 Ibid, pafiim. Camden, p. 44-7. 

blame 




ELIZABETH. 209 

biame, and even of deteftation, againfl the cruelties 
exercifed on his proteftant fubjefts ''. Meanwhile, 
fhe prepared herfelf for that attack which feemed to ,^^,7 
threaten her from the combined pov/er and violence 
of the Romanifts : She fortified Portfmoijith, put her 
fleet in order, exercifed her militia, cultivated popu- 
larity with her fubjeds, a6led with vigour for the 
farther reduction of Scotland under obedience to the 
young king, and renewed her alliance with the Ger- 
man princes, who were no lefs alarmed than herfelf 
at thefe treacherous and fanguinary meafures, fo 
univerfally embraced by the catholics. 

But though Elizabeth cautioully avoided coming 
to extremities with Charles, the greatefl: fecurity that 
jfhe polielfed againfl his violence was derived from 
the difficulties which the obftinate refiftance of the 
hugonots flill created to him. Such of that fe6t as French aft; 
lived near the frontiers, immediately, on the firft f^"s« 
news of the maflacres, fled into England, Germany, 1573. 
or Switzerland ; where they excited the compaffion 
and indignation of the proteflants, and prepared 
themfelves, with encreafed forces and redoubled zeal, 
to return into France, and avenge the treacherous 
flaughter of their brethren. Thoie who lived in the 
middle of the kingdom, took fhelter in the neareft 
garrifons occupied by the hugonots ; and finding, 
that they could repofe no faith in capitulations, and 
expe£l no clemency, were determined to defend 
themfelves to the lafl extremity. The feft, which 
Charles had hoped at one blow to exterminate, had 
now an army of eighteen thoufand men on foot, and 
pofTelTed, in different parts of the kingdom, above a 
hundred cities, caflles, or fortreffes ' ; nor could that 
prince deem himfelf fecure from the invafion threat- 
ened him by all the other proteflants in Europe. 
The nobility and gentry of England were roufed to 

^ Digges, p. 197, 198. Camden, p. 447. i Digges, p. 34.3. 

Vol, V, F fuck 



21* HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, fucli a pitch of refentment, that they offered td levy 
,^^^^V^ an army of twenty thoufand foot and four thou- 
,^73"^ fand horfe, to tranfport them into France, and to 
maintain them fix months at their own charge : But 
Ehzabeth^ who was cautious in her meafures, and 
who feared to inflame farther the quarrel between 
the two rehgions by thefe dangerous crufades, re- 
fufed her confent, and moderated the zeal of her 
fubjects '". The German princes, lefs political or 
more fecure from the refentment of France, for- 
warded the levies made by the proteflants ; and th© 
young prince of Cond^, having efcaped from court, 
put himfelf at the head of thcfe troops, and pre- 
pared to invade the kingdom. The duke of Alen^on, 
the king of Navarre, the family of Montmorenci, 
and many confiderable men even among the catho- 
lics, difpleafed, either on a private or public ac- 
count, with the meafures of the court, favoured the 
progrefs of the hugonots ; and every thing relapfed 
into confufion. The king, inftead of repenting his 
violent counfels, which had brought matters to fuch 
J574. extremities, called aloud for new violences ' ; nor 
could even the mortal diftemper under which he 
laboured, moderate the rage and animofity by which 
3f)th May. ^g ^^g aftuated. He died without male iffue, at the 
age of twenty-five years ; a prince, whofe charadter, 
containing that unufual mixture of diffimulation and 
ferocity, of quick refentment and unrelenting ven- 
geance, executed the greateft mifchiefs, and threat- 
ened Hill worfe, both to his native country and to 
all Europe. 

Henry, duke of Anjou, who had, fome time 
before, been elecled king of Poland, no fooner heard 
of his brother's death, than he haftened to take 
poffelhon of the throne of France ; and found the 
kingdom not only involved in the greateft prefent 

^ I^'og'^f) p' 335» 34i» ' Davila, lib. v. 

diforders. 



ELIZABETH. 211 

diTorders, but expofed to infirmities, for which it CHAP, 
was extremely difficult to provide any fuitable re- ^^^JlL. 
medy. The people were divided into two theolo- j^^^. 
gical factions, furious from their zeal, and mutually 
enraged from the injuries which they had committed 
or fuffered ; and as all faith had been violated and 
moderation banifhed, it feemed imprafticable to 
find any terms of compofition between them. Each 
party had devoted itfelf to leaders, v/hofe commands 
had more authority than the will of the fovereign ; 
and even the cathohcs, to whom the king was at- 
tached, were entirely conducted by the counfels of 
Guife and his family* The religious connexions 
had, on both fides, fuperfeded the civil ; or rather 
(for men will always be guided by prefent intereit)^ 
two empires being fecretly formed in the kingdom,, 
every individual was engaged by new views of in» 
tereft to follow thofe leaders, to whom, during the 
courfe of pall convulfions. he had been indebted for 
his honours and preferment. 

Henry, obferving the low condition of the 
crown, had laid a fcheme for reftorinff his own 
authority, by acting as umpire betv/een the parties, 
by moderating their differences^ and by reducing 
both to a dependence upon himfelf. He poflefled 
all the talents of diffimulation requifite for the exe- 
cution of this delicate plan ; but being deficient in 
vigour, application, and found judgment, inflead of 
acquiring a fuperiority over both factions, he loft the 
confidence of both, and taught the partifans of each 
to adhere ftill more clofely to their particular leaders, 
whom they found more cordial and fincere in the caufe 
which they efpoufed. The hugonots were ftrength- 1576,; 
ened by the acceffion of a German army under the 
prince of Conde and prince Cafimir ; but much more 
by the credit and peribnal virtues of the king of Na» 
varre, who, having fled from court, had placed him- 
felf at the head of that formidable party. Henry, 
Pa in 



212 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, m profecution of his plan, entered into a compofi-. 
^^L, tion with them ; and being defirous of preferving a 
,.^(5. balance between the fe6ts, he granted them peace 
on the moft advanta'^eous conditions. This was the 
fifth general peace made with the hugonots ; but 
though it was no more fmcere on the part of the 
court than any of the former, it gave the higheft 
difguft to the cathohcs ; and afforded the duke of 
Guife the defired pretence of declaiming againft the 
meafures, and maxims, and condu6t of the king. 

That artful and bold leader took thence an 
occafion of reducing his ' party into a more formed 
and regular body ; and he laid the firfl foundations 
of the famous League, which, without paying any 
regard to the royal authority, aimed at the entire 
fupprellion of the hugonots. Such was the unhappy 
condition of France, from the pafl feverities and 
violent conduct of its princes, that toleration could 
no longer be admitted ; and a conceffion for liberty 
. of confcience, which would probably have appeafed 
the reformers, excited the greateft refentment in the 
J 577. catholics. Henry, in order to divert the force of the 
league from himfelf, and even to elude its efforts 
againfl the hugonots, declared himfelf the head of 
that feditious confederacy, and took the field as 
leader of the Romanifls. But his dilatory and feeble 
meafures betrayed his reluctance to the undertaking ; 
and after fome unfuccefsful attempts, he concluded 
a new peace, which, though lefs favourable than the 
former to the proteftants, gave no contentment to 
the catholics. Mutual diffidence flill prevailed be- 
tween the parties ; the king's moderation was fufpi- 
cious to both ; each fadtion continued to fortify itfelf 
againft that breach, which, they forefaw, muft fpeed- 
ily enfue ; theological controverfy daily whetted the 
animofity of the fects ; and every private injury be- 
came the ground of a public quarrel. 

The 



ELIZ ABETH. 



213 



The king, hoping, by his artifice and fubtlety, CHAP, 
to allure the nation into a love of pleafure and re- ■^^• 
pofe, was himfelf caught in the fnare ; and, linking .g 
into a difTolute indolence, wholly loft the efteem, 
and, in a great meafure, the affeftions of his peo- 
ple. Inftead of advancing fuch men of charafter and 
abilities as were neuters between thefe dangerous 
factions, he gave all his confidence to young agree- 
able favourites, who, unable to prop his falling 
authority, leaned entirely upon it, and inflamed the 
general odium againft his adminiftration. The 
public burdens, encreafed by his profufe liberality, 
and felt more heavy on a difordered kingdom,, be- 
came another ground of complaint ; and the un- 
controlled animofity of parties, joined to the mul- 
tiplicity of taxes, rendered peace more calamitous 
than any open ftate of foreign or . even domeftic 
hoftility. The artifices of the king were too refined 1579- 
to fucceed, and too frequent to be concealed ; and 
the plain, dired, and avowed condu6l of the duke 
^ of Guife on one fide, and that of the king of Na- 
varre on the other, drew by degrees the generahty 
of the nation to devote themfelves without referve to 
one or the other of thofe great leaders. 

The civil commotions of France were of too 
general im.portance to be overlooked by the other 
princes of Europe ; and Elizabeth's forefight and 
vigilance, though fomewhat reftrained by her fru- 
gality, led her to take fecretly fome part in them. 
Befides employing on all occafions her good offices 
in favour of the hugonots, fhe had expended no 
inconfiderable funis in levying that army of Ger- 
mans which the prince of Conde and prince Cafniiir 
Gonduded into France "' ; and notwithftanding her 
negotiations with the court, and her profeflions of 
amity, Ihe always confidered her own interefts as 
conneded with the profperity of the French pro- 
si Camden, p, 4^2, 

P 3 teftants 



'-ii4 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, teftants and the deprefTion of the houfe of Guife, 
^^' Philip, on the other hand, had declared himfelf pro- 
teftor of the league; had entered into the clofeft 
correfpondence with Guife ; and had employed all 
his authority in fupporting the credit of that fa(ftious 
leader. The fympathy of religion, which of itfeif 
begat a connection of interefts, was one confiderable 
inducement ; but that monarch had alfo in view, the 
fubduing of his rebeUious fubjedls in the Nether- 
lands J who, as they received great encouragement 
from the French proteftants, would, he hoped, 
finally defpair of fuccefs, after the entire fuppreffion 
of their friends and confederates, 
pivil wnrs The fame political views which engaged Eliza- 
Counier! ^^^^ ^^ fupport the hugonots, would have led her 
to affifl the diftreflfed proteftants in the Low Coun- 
tries ; but the mighty power of Philip, the tran- 
quillity of all his other dominions, and the great 
force which he maintained in thefe mutinous pro- 
vinces, kept her in awe, and obliged her, notwith- 
ifanding all temptations and all provocations, to 
preferve fome terms of amity with that monarch. 
The Spanifli ambaifador reprefented to her, that 
many of the Flemifli exiles, who infeiled the feas, 
and preyed on his mafter's fubjecls, were received 
into the harbours of England, and were there al- 
lowed to difpofe of their prizes ; and by thefe re- 
monflrances the queen found herfelf under a ne- 
ceflity of denying them all entrance into her do- 
minions. But this meafure proved in the ifTue ex- 
tremely prejudicial to the interells of Philip. Thefe 
defperate exiles, finding no longer any poflibility of 
fubfiflence, were forced to attempt the moft perilous 
enterprifcs ; and they made an alfault on the Brille, 
a fea-port town in Holland, where they met with 
fuccefs, and, after a fhort relillance, became mafters 
of the place ^ The duke of Alva was alarmed at 

" Csnidcn, p, 44.3- 

the 



ELIZABETH. 1215 

the danger ; and, (lopping thofe bloody executloiits chap. 
which he was making on the defencelefs Flemings, v^^_,J„^ 
he haftened with his army to extinguiih the flame, ,575. 
which, falling on materials fo well prepared for com- 
buftion, feemed to menace a general conflagration. 
His fears foon appeared to be well-grounded. The 
people in the neighbourhood of the Brille, enraged 
by that complication of cruelty, opprefTion, info- 
lence, ufurpation, and perfecution, under which they 
and all their countrymen laboured, flew to arms ; 
and in a few days almoft the whole province of 
Holland and that of Zealand had revolted from the 
Spaniards, and had openly declared againft the ty- 
ranny of Alva. This event happened in the year 

William, prince of Orange, defcended from a 
fovereign family of great ludre and antiquity in 
Germany, inheriting the polfeflions of a fovereign 
family in France, had fixed his refidence in the Low 
Countries ; and on account of his noble birth and 
immenfe riches^ as well as of his perfonal merit, was 
univerfally regarded as the greateil fubjedt that lived 
in thofe provinces. He had oppofed, by all regular 
and dutiful means, the progrefs of the Spanifh ufurp- 
ations ; and when Alva conduced his army into 
the Netherlands, and alfumed the government, this 
prince, well acquainted with the violent charader of 
the man, and the tyrannical fpirit of the court of 
Madrid, wifely fled from the danger which threatened 
him, and retired to his paternal eftate and dominions 
in Germany. He was cited to appear before Alva*s 
tribunal, was condemned in abfcnce, was declared a 
rebel, and his ample poifeiTions in the Low Coun- 
tries were confifcated. In revenge he had levied an 
army of proteftants in the empire, and had made 
ibme attempts to reftore the Flemings to liberty ; 
but was (till repulfed with lofs by the vigilance and 
IBJIitary conduct of Alva, and by the great bravery, 
P4 »s 



^i^ HISTORY OF ENGLAND, 

CHAP, as well as difclpllne, of thofe veteran Spaniards who 
■^^' ferved under that general. 



j^yj. Th£ revolt of Holland and Zealand, provinces 
which the prince of Orange had formerly com-? 
manded, and where he was much beloved, called 
him anew from his retreat ; and he added conduft, 
no lefs than fpirit, to that obflinate refiflanee which 
was here made to the Spanifh dominion. By uniting 
the revolted cities in a league, he laid the foundation 
of that illuftrious commonwealth, the offspring of 
induftry and hberty, whofe arms and policy have long 
made fo fignal a figure in every tranfaftion of Eu? 
rope. He inflamed the inhabitants by every motive 
which religious zeal, refentment, or love of free- 
dom could infpire. Though the prefent greatnefs 
of the Spanllh monarchy might deprive them of 
^11 courage, he dill flattered them with the concur- 
rence of the other provinces, and with affiflance 
from neighbouring dates ; and he exhorted them, in 
(defence of their religion, their Hberties, their lives, 
to endure the utmofl extremities of war. From this 
fpirit proceeded the defperate defence of Harlem ; 
a defence which nothing but the moft confuming 
famine could overconie, and which the Spaniards 
revenged by the execution of more than two thoufand 
pf the inhabitants °, This extremes ieverity, inftead 
of ftriking terror into the Hollanders, animated them 
by defpair ; and the vigorous refiflanee made at Ale-; 
maer, where Alva was finally repulfed, fliewed them 
that their infolent enemies were not invincible. The 
duke, finding at laft the pernicious effects of his vio-. 
}ent counfels, folicited to be recalled ; Medina-celi, 
who was appointed his fucceffor, refufed to accept 
the government : Requefens, commendator of Caf- 
tile, was fent from Italy to replace Alva ; and this 
tyrant departed from the Netherlands . in 1574? 

P Bentjvoglio, lib, 7, 

leaving 



ELIZABETH. 217 

leaving his name in execration to the Inhabitants, c H A. p, 
and boafliing, in his turn, that, during the courfe of ^^• 
five years, he had delivered above eighteen thoufand ^ ^ 
of thofe rebeUious heretics into the hands of the 
executioner ^, 

Requesens, though a man of milder difpofitions, 
could not appeafe the violent hatred which the re- 
volted Hollanders had conceived againfl the Spanifh 
government ; and the war continued as obftinate as 
ever. In the fiege of Leyden, undertaken by the 
Spaniards, the Dutch opened the dykes and lluices, 
in order to drive them from the enterprife; and the 
very peafants were aftive in ruining their fields by 
an inundation, rather than fall again under the hated 
tyranny of Spain, But not with (landing this re- 
pulfe, the governor ftill purfued the war ; and the 
contefl feemed too unequal between fo mighty a 
monarchy, and two fmall provinces, however for- 
tified by nature, and however defended by the defpe- 
rate refolution of the inhabitants. The prince of 
Orange, therefore, in 1575, was refolved to fue for 
foreign fuccour, and to make applications to one or 
other of his great neighbours, Henry or Elizabeth. 
The court of France was not exempt from the fame 
fpirit of tyranny and perfecution which prevailed 
among the Spaniards ; and that kingdom, torn by 
domeftic diifenfioiis, feemed not to enjoy, at prefent, 
either leifure or ability to pay regard to foreign in- 
terefts. But England, long connected, both by com- 
merce and alliance, with the Netherlands, and now 
more concerned in the fate of the revolted pro- 
vinces by fympathy in religion, feemed naturally 
mterefted in their defence ; and as Elizabeth had 
juftly entertained great jealoufy of Philip, and go- 
verned her kingdom in perfed tranquillity, hopes 
were entertained, that her policy, her ambition, or 

F Grotius, lib. li. 

her 



^i8 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

C HAP. her generofity, would engage her to fupport them 
^Jj^^^^ under their prefent calamities. They lent therefore 
j^7g^ a folemn embaffy to London, confiding of St. Alde- 
gonde, Douza, Nivelle, Buys, and Melfen ; and 
after employing the moll humble fuppHcations to 
the queen, they offered her the polTeflion and fove- 
reignty of their provinces, if flie would exert her 
power in their defence. 

There were many ftrong motives which might 
impel Elizabeth to accept of fo liberal an offer. 
She was apprifed of the injuries which Philip had 
done her, by his intrigues with the malcontents in 
England and Ireland "^ : She forefaw the danger 
which ihe muff incur from a total prevalence of the 
catholics in the Low Countries : And the maritime 
ifituation of thofe provinces, as well as their com- 
mand over the great rivers, was an inviting circum- 
ftance to a nation like the Englifh, who were be- 
ginning 10 cultivate commerce and naval power. 
But this princefs, though magnanimous, had never 
entertained the ambition of making conquefts, or 
gaining new acquifitions ; and the whole purpofe of 
her vigilant and a6live politics was to maintain, by 
the moil frugal and cautious expedients, the tran- 
quillity of her own dominions. An open war with 
the Spanifh monarchy was the apparent confequence 
of her accepting the dominion of thefe provinces ; 
and after taking the inhabitants under her pro- 
tedion, fhe could never afterwards in honour aban- 
don them, but, however delperate their defence 
might become, flie mull embrace it, even farther 
than her convenience or interefts would permit. 
For thefe reafons, fhe refufed, in pofitive terms, the 
fovereignty proffered her ; but told the ambaffadors, 
that, in return for the good-will which the prince of 
Orange and the States had fhewn her, fhe would er;- 

5 Digges, p. 73» 

i, i deavouj;' 



?5?9. 



ELIZABETH. 21^ 

deavour to mediate an agreement for them, on the chap, 
moft reafonable terms that could be obtained "■. She . ^^; 
fent accordingly fir Henry Cobham Vo Philip ; and 
reprefentcd to him the danger which he -would incur 
of lohng entirely the Low Countries, if France could 
obtain the leaft interval from her intefline diforders, 
and find leilure to offer her prote6lion to thofe mu- 
tinous and difcontented provinces. Philip feemed 
to take this remcnflrance in good part ; but no ac- 
cord enfued, and war in the Netherlands continued 
with the fame raece and violence as before. 

It was an accident that delivered the Hollanders 
from their prefent defperate fituation. Requefens, 
the governor, dying fuddenly, the Spanifli troops, 
difcontented for want of pay, and licentious for 
want of a proper authority to command them, 
broke into a furious mutiny, and threw every thing 
into confufion. They facked and pillaged the 
cities of Maeftricht and Antwerp, and executed 
great flaughter on the inhabitants : They threatened 
the other cities with a like fate : And all the pro- 
vinces, excepting Luxembourg, united for mutual 
defence againfh their violence, and called in the 
prince of Orange and the Hollanders, as their pro- 
teftors. A treaty, commonly called the Pacification 
of Ghent, was formed by common agreement ; and 
the removal of foreign troops, with the reftoration. 
of their ancient liberties, was the objeft which the 
provinces mutually ftipulated to purfue. Don John 
of Auftria, natural brother to Philip, being ap- 
pointed governor, found, on bis arrival at Luxem- 
bourg, that the States had fo fortified themfelves, and 
that the Spanifli troops were fo divided by their fitu- 
ation, that there was no pofTibilityof refiftance; and he 
agreed to the terms required of him. The Spaniards 
evacuated the country ; and thefe provinces feemed 
at lall to breathe a little from their calamities. 

r Camden, p. 4.53, 4.S4-. 

But 




»579- 



220 HI'STORY OF ENGLAND. 

But it was not eafy to fettle entire peace, while the 
thiril of revenge and dominion governed the king of 
Spain,and while theFlemings were fo ftrongly agitated 
with refentment of paft, and fear of future, injuries. 
The ambition of Don John, who coveted this great 
theatre for his military talents, engagv'^d him rather 
to inflame than appeafe the quarrel ; and as he found 
the States determined to impofe very drift limitations 
on his authority, he broke all articles, feized Namur, 
and procured the recal of the Spanifh army from 
Italy. This prince, endowed with a lofty genius, 
and elated by the profperous fucceffes of his youth, 
had opened his mind to vaft undertakings ; and 
looking much beyond the conqueft of the revolted 
provinces, had projected to elpoufe the queen of 
Scots, and to acquire in her right the dominion of 
the Britifh kingdoms \ Elizabeth was aware of his 
intentions ; and feeing now, from the union of all 
the provinces, a fair profped: of their making a long 
and vigorous defence againfi: Spain, fhe no longer 
fcrupled to embrace the protedion of their liberties, 
which feemed fo intimately connected with her own 
fafety. After fending them a fum of money, about 
twenty thoufand pounds, for the immediate pay of 
their troops, Ihe concluded a treaty with them ; in 
which fhe ftipulated to affill them with five thoufand 
foot and a thoufand horfe, at the charge of the Fle- 
mings; and to lend them a hundred thoufand pounds, 
on receiving the bonds of fome of the molt confi- 
derable towns of the Netherlands, for her repay- 
ment within the year. It was farther agreed, that 
the commander of the Engiilh army Ihould be ad- 
mitted into the council of the States ; and nothing 
be determined concerning war or peace, without 
previoufly informing the queen or him of it ; that 
they fhould enter into no league without her confent 5 

* Camden, p. 466. Grotius, lib, iii. 

that 



ELIZABETH. 2U 

that if any difcord arofe among themfelves, it lliould chap. 
be referred to her arbitration ; and that if any ^^^^L. 
prince, on any pretext, fliould attempt hoflilities j^^g, ' 
againft her, they fhould fend to her affiflance an 
army equal to that whjch fhe had employed in their 
defence. This alliance was figned on the 7th of 
January 1578'. 

. One confiderable inducement to the queen for 
entering into treaty with the States was, to prevent 
their throwing themfelves into the arms of France ; 
and fhe was defirous to make the king of Spain 
believe that it was her fole motive. She reprefented 
to him, by her ambalfador, Thomas Wilkes, that 
hitherto fhe had religiouily a6led the part of a good 
neighbour and ally ; had refufed the fovereignty of 
Holland and Zealand, when offered her ; had ad- 
vifed the prince of Orange to fubmit to the king ; and 
had even accompanied her counfel with menaces, in 
cafe of his refufal. She perfevered, fhe faid, in the 
fame friendly intentions ; and as a proof of it, 
would venture to interpofe with her advice for the 
compofure of the prefent differences : Let Don 
John, whom fhe could not but regard as her mortal 
enemy, be recalled ; let fome other prince more 
popular be fubftituted in his room ; let the Spanifh 
armies be withdrawn ; let the Flemings be reftored 
to their ancient liberties and privileges : And if, 
after thefe concefTions, ■ they were flill obftinate not 
to return their duty, fhe prdmifed to join her 
arms with thofe of the king of Spain, and force 
them to compliance. Philip diffembled his refent- 
ment againft the queen ; and ftill continued to 
fupply Don John with money and troops. That 
prince, though once repulfed at Rimenant by the 
valour of the Englifh under Norris, and though op- 
pofed, as well by the army of the States as by prince 
Cafmiir, who had conduced to the Low Coun» 
tries a great body of Germans, paid by the queen, 

t C^inden, p. 466. 

' gained 



222 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

c H \ T. gained a great advantage over the Flemings at 
y^^^^Z,^ Gemblours ; but M^as cut off in the midft of his 
*579« profperity by poifon, given him fecretly, as was 
lufpeded, by orders from Philip, who dreaded his 
ambition. The prince of Parma fucceeded to the 
command ; who, uniting valour and clemency, ne- 
gotiation and military exploits, made great progrefs 
againft the revolted Flemings, and advanced the pro- 
grefs of the Spaniards by his arts, as well as by his 
arms. 

During thefe years, while Europe was almofl 
every where in great commotion, England enjoyed 
a profound tranquillity ; owing chiefly to the pru- 
dence and vigour of the queen's adminiftration, and 
to the wife precautions which fhe employed in all 
her meafures. By fupporting the zealous proteflants 
in Scotland, fhe had twice given them the fupe- 
riority over their antagonifts, had clofely connected 
their interefts with her own, and had procured herfelf 
entire fecurityfrom that quarter whence the mod dan- 
gerous invafions could be made upon her. She faw in 
France her enemies, the Guifes, though extremely 
powerful, yet counterbalanced by the hugonots, her 
zealous partifans ; and even hated by the king, 
who was jealous of their reftlefs and exorbitant am- 
bition. The bigotry of Philip gave her juft ground 
of anxiety ; but the fame bigotry had happily ex- 
cited the mod obftinate oppofition among his own 
fubjefts, and had created him enemies, whom his 
arms and policy were not likely foon to fubdue. 
The queen of Scots, her antagonift and rival, and 
the pretender to her throne, was a prifoner in her 
hands ; and by her impatience and high fpirit had 
been engaged in practices, which afforded the queen 
a pretence for rendering her confinement more ri- 
gorous, and for cutting off her communication with 
her partifans in England. 

Religion was the capital point, on which de- 
pended all the political tranfa^tions of that age; 

1 1 and 



iS79« 



ELIZABETH. 223 

and the queen's condud in this particular, making chap. 
allowance for the prevailing prejudices of the times, ■^^^' 
could fcarcely be accufed of feverity or imprudence. 
She eftablifhed no inquifition into men's bofoms : 
She impofed no oath of fupremacy, except on thofe 
who received truft or emolument from the public : 
And though the exercife of every religion but the 
eftablifhed was prohibited by flatute, the violation 
of this law, by faying mafs, and receiving the fa- 
crament in private houfes, was, in many inftances, 
connived at " ; while, on the other hand, the ca- 
tholics, in the beginning of her reign, fhewed little 
reludance againft going to church, or frequenting 
the ordinary duties of public worfhip. The pope, 
fenfible that this pradice would by degrees reconcile 
all his partifans to the reformed religion, haflened 
the pubHcation of the bull, which excommunicated 
the queen, and freed her fubjefts from their oaths 
of allegiance ; and great pains were taken by the 
emifTaries of Rome, to render the breach between 
the two religions as wide as pofTible, and to make 
the frequenting of proteflant churches appear highly 
criminal in the catholics'^. Thefe practices, with 
the rebellion which enfued, encreafed the vigilance 
and feverity of the government ; but the Romanifts, 
if their condition were compared with that of the 
Nonconformifts in other countries, and with their 
own maxims where they domineered, could not 
juflly complain of violence or perfecution. 

The queen appeared rather m.ore anxious to keep 
a i\.n&. hand over the puritans ; who, though their 
pretenfions were not fo immediately dangerous to 
her authority, feemed to be aftuated bv a more un- 
reafonable obftinacy, and to retain claims, of which, 
both in civil and ecclefiaflical matters, it was, as 
yetj difficult to difcern the full fcope and intention. 

" Camden, p. 4.^9. w Walfingham's Letter in Burnet, vol. if, 
p. 418. Cabala, p. 406. 

Some 



»579' 



ia4 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP. Some fecret attempts of that fc6l to cflablifli a fe-* 
-I'l-. i P'l^'^fc congregation and difciplinc had been care- 
fully rcprc'tfcd in the begimiing of tliis reign * ; and 
when any of the eflablilhed clergy difcovcred a ten- 
dency to their principles, by omittmg the legal habits 
or ceremonies, the queen had fhevvn a determined 
refokition to punifh th-im by fmes and deprivation ^ ; 
though her orders to that purpofe had been fre- 
quently eluded, by the fecret j)rote6tion which thefc 
fedaries received from fome of her mod confiderablc 
courtiers. 

Bu'i' wliat chiefly tended to gain Klizabeth the 
hearts of her fubjerts, was, her Irugality, which, 
though carried fomctimes to an extreme, led her not 
to amafs treafures, but only to prevent impofitions 
upon her people, who were at that time very little 
accultomed to bear the burthens of government. 
By means of her rigid aconomy, Ihe j^aid all the 
debts which flic found on the crown, with their full 
intereft ; though fomc of thefe debts had been con- 
tracted even during the reign of her father''. Some 
loans, which Ihe had exadted at the commence- 
ment of her reign, were repaid by her ; a pradice 
in that age fomewhat unufual '' : And flie eftabliflied 
her credit on fuch a footing, that no fovereign in 
Europe could more readily command any fum, 
which the public exigencies might at any time re- 
quire ''. During this peaceable and uniform govern- 
ment, England furnilhes few materials for hiflory ; 
and except the fmall part which Elizabeth took in 
foreign tranfaOions, there fcarcely paifed any oc- 
currence which requires a particular detail. 
Apaiiia- TiH^ moll memorable event in this period was a 
ment. fcllion of parliament, held on the 8th of Eebruary 
1576^ where debates were flartcd, which may ap- 

'f Strypc's Lite of I'aiktT, p. •t+i. Il)iil. Life of Grinda), p. 315. 
1 lleylin, |>, 165, i66, ^ D'Ewcs, p. 14.5. Camden, j>. 446, 

* D'liwcs, p. 246. ^ Ibid. p. 245. 

13 pear 



I 



ELIZABETH. 225 

appear fomewhat curious and fmgular. Peter Went- chap, 
worth, a puritan, who had lignalized himfclf in ^^^^J^,^ 
former parliaments by his free and undaunted fplrit, j^^^, 
opened this feffion with a premeditated harangue, 
which drew on him the indignation of the houfe, 
and gave great olfence to the queen and the mi- 
nifters. As it feems to contain a rude fketch of 
thofe principles of liberty which happily gained af- 
terwards the afcendant in England, it may not be 
improper to give, in a few words, the fubflance of 
it. He premifed, that the very name of liberty is 
fweet ; but the thing itfclf is precious beyond the 
«io(l ineftimable trcafure : And that it behoved 
them to be careful, left, contenting themfelves with 
the fweetnefs of the name, they forego the fubftance, 
and abandon what of all earthly poiTeiTions was of 
the higheft value to the kingdom. He then pro- 
ceeded to obferve, that freedom of fpeech in that 
houfe, a privilege fo ufcful both to Sovereign and 
fubject, had been formerly infringed in many efTential 
articles, and was at prefent expofed to the moft im- 
minent danger : That it was ufual, when any fubjecl 
of importance was handled, efpecially if it regarded 
religion, to furmife, that thefe topics were diiagree^ 
able to the queen, and that the farther proceeding 
in them would draw down her indignation upon their 
temerity: That Solomon had juftly affirmed the 
king's cfifplcafure to be a meffenger of death ; and 
it was no wonder if men, even though urged by 
motives of confcience and duty, fliould bf inclined 
to ftop fhort, when they found themfelves expofed 
Jo fo fevere a penalty : That, by the employing of 
this argument, the houfe 'was incapacitated from 
ferving their country, and even from ferving the 
queen herfelf ; whofe ears, befieged by pernicious 
flatterers, were thereby rendered inacceffible to the 
moft falutary truths : That it was a mockery to 
call an affembly a parliament, yet deny it that privi- 
lege, which was fo efTential to its bein^, and without 
Vol. V. Q^ which 




1579- 



226 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

which it muft degenerate into an abje6l fchool of 
fervility and diflimuladon : That, as the parliament 
was the great guardian of the laws, they ought to 
have liberty to difcharge their truft, and to maintain 
that authority whence even kings themfelves derive 
their being : That a king was conflituted fuch by 
law, and though he was not dependent on man, yet 
was he fubordinate to God and the law, and was 
obliged to make their prefcriptions, not his own 
will, the rule of his condud: : That even his com- 
miflion, as God*s vicegerent, enforced, inftead of 
loofening, this obligation ; fmce he was thereby in- 
veiled with authority to execute on earth the will of 
God, which is nothing but law and juftice : That 
though thefe furmifes of difpleafmg the queen by 
their proceedings, had impeached, in a very effential 
point, all freedom of fpeech, a privilege granted 
them by a fpecial law ; yet was there a more ex- 
prefs and more dangerous invafion made on their 
liberties, by frequent meflages from the throne : 
That it had become a practice, when the houfe was 
entering on any queilion, either ecclefiaftical or civil, 
to bring an order from the queen, inhibiting them 
abfolutely from treating of fuch matters, and debar- 
ring them from all farther difcuffion of thefe mo- 
mentous articles : That the prelates, emboldened by 
her royal protection, had affumed a decifive power in 
all queftions of rehgion, and required that every 
one flrould implicitly fubmit his faith to their arbi- 
trary detQi"minations : That the love which he bore 
his fovereign, forbade him to be filent under fuch 
abufes, or to facrifice, on this important occafion, 
his duty to fervile flattery and complaifance : And 
that as no earthly creature was exempt from fault, 
fo neither was the queen herfelf ; but, in impofmg 
this fervitude on her faithful commons, had com- 
mitted a great, and even dangerous, fault againfl 
herfelf and the whole commonwealth \ 
c D'Ewcs, p. 236, 237, &c. 

It 



E L T Z A B E T W; 22^ 

It is eafy to obferve, from this fpeech, that, in C H A P. 
this dawn of liberty, the parHamentary flile was ftill ■^'^^1* 
Crude and unformed ; and that the proper decorum ,57^, ' 
of attacking minifters and counfellors, without in- 
terefting the honour of the crown, or mentioning 
the perfon of the fovereign, was not yet entirely 
eftablifhed. The commons exprefled great difo 
pleafure at this unufual licence : They fequeftered 
Wentworth from the houfe, and committed him pri- 
foner to the ferjeant at arms. They even ordered 
him to be examined by a committee, confiding of all 
thofe members who were alfo members of the privy- 
council ; and a report to be next day made to the 
houfe. This committee met in the ftar-chamber, 
and, wearing the afpeft of that arbitrary court, funi° 
moned Wentworth to appear before them and 
anfwer for his behaviour. But though the commons 
had difcovered fo little delicacy or precaution, in 
thus confounding their own authority with that of 
the ftar-chamber ; Wentworth better underftood thd 
principles of liberty, and refufed to give thefe coun- 
fellors any account of his conduct in parliament, till 
he were fatisfied that they afted, not as members of 
the privy-council, but as a committee of the houfe ''. 
He juftified his liberty of fpeech, by pleading the 
rigour and hardlhip of the queen's meffages ; and, 
notwithftanding that the committee fhewed him, by 
inftances in other reigns, that the practice of fending 
fuch meffages was not unprecedented, he would not 
agree to exprefs any forrow or repentance. The 
ilfue of the affair was, that, after a month's confine- 
ment, the queen fent to the commons, informing 
them, that, from her fpecial grace and favour, fhe 
'had reftored him to his liberty, and to his place in 
the houfe ". By this feeming lenity, (he indireililly 
retained the power which fhe had affumed, of im- 
prifoning the members, and obliging them to anfwer 

^ D'Ewes, p. 241. « Ibid, p. 244.. 

Qj2 before 




^28 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

before her for their condud in parliament. And fif 
Walter Mildmay endeavoured to make the houfe 
jj75^ fenfible of her majefty*s goodnefs in fo gently remit- 
ting the indignation which fhe might juflly conceive 
at the temerity of their member : But he informed 
them, that they had not the Hberty of fpeaking what 
and of whom they pleafed ; and that indifcreet free- 
doms ufed in that houfe had, both in the prefent and 
foregoing ages, met with a proper chailifement. He 
warned them, therefore, not to abufe farther the 
queen's clemency j left ftie be conftrained, contrary 
to her inclination, to turn an unfuccefsful lenity into 
a neceifary feverity ^ 

Tpie behaviour of the two houfes was, in every 
other refpeft, equally tame and fubmiflive. Inftead 
of a bill, which was at firft introduced ^, for the re- 
formation of the church, thev were contented to 
prefent a petition to her majefty for that purpofe : 
And when flie told them that ihe would give orders 
to her bilhops to amend all abufes, and if they were 
negligent, fhe would herfelf, by her fupreme power 
and authority over the church, give fuch redrefs as 
would entirely fatisfy the nation ; the parliament 
willingly acquiefced in this fovereign and peremptory 
decifion \ 

Though the commons fhewed fo little fpirit in 
oppofmg the authority of the crown, they maintain- 
ed, this feffion, their dignity againft an encroachment 
of the peers, and would not agree to a conference 
^hich, they thought, was demanded of them in an 
irregular manner. They acknowledged, however, 
with all humblenefs (fuch is their expreffion), the 
fuperiority of the lords : They only refufed to give 
that houfe any reafon for their proceedings ; and 
afferted, that where they altered a bill fent them by 
the peers, it belonged to them to defire a conference, 
jiot to the upper houfe to require it '. « 

f D'Ewes, p. 459, g Ibid. p. 25a, »> Ibid. p. 457, 

i Ibid^ p, 363. 

1 1 The 



ELIZABETH. 22<? 

The commons granted an aid of one fubfidy and ^ ^^^ ^ P- 
two fifteenths. Mildmay, in order to fdtisfy the v.^^.y-^^ 
houfe concerning the reafonablenefs of this grant, 1579. 
entered into a detail of the queen's paft expences 
in fupporting the government, and of the encreafmg 
charges of the crown, from the daily encreafe in the 
price of all commodities. He did not, however, for- 
get to admonifh them, that they were to regard this 
detail as the pure effect of the queen's condefcen- 
fion, fmce fhe was not bound to give them any ae- 
Qount how llie employed her treafure ■", 

^ D'Ewes, p. 246, 



Q.3 



230 HISTORY OF ENGLAND^ 



CHAP. XLI. 

lAffairs of Scotland Spanifi affairs Sir Francis 

Drake — ^—r-A parliament Negotiations of mar-- 

rtage with the duke of Anjou Affairs of Scot- 
land — ' — Letter of queen Mary to Elizabeth 

Confpiracies in England A parliamem » 

T^he ecclefiafiical commijfion Affairs of the Low 

Countries— Hojiilities with Spain, 

»CHAP. MpHE greateft and moft abfolute fecurity that 
^^f^^- Jl Elizabeth enjoyed during her whole reign, 
jj8o. never exempted her from vigilance and attention; 
but the fcene began now to be more overcaft, and 
dangers gradually multipHed on her from more than 
one quarter. 
AfFairs of The earl of Morton had hitherto retained Scot- 
Scotland. \2j\^ in flrift alliance with the queen, and had alfo 
reftored domeflic tranquillity to rhat kingdom : But 
it was not to be expected that the factitious and legal 
authority of a regent v.'ould long maintain itfelf in 
a country unacquaintea wirh law and order ; where 
even the natural dominion cf hereditary princes fo 
often met with oppofuion and control. The nobi- 
lity began anew to break into factions : The people 
were difgufled with fome inftances of Morton's ava- 
rice : A ad the clergy, who complained of farther 
encroachments on their narrow revenue, joined and 
encreafed the difcontent of the other orders. The 
regent was ienfible of his dangerous fituation ; and 
having dropped fome peevilh expreflions, as if he 
were willing or defirous to refign, the noblemen of 
the opi cfi e party, favourites of the young king, 
laid ho^d ox this conceffion, and required that de- 

15 miflion 



ELIZABETH. 231 

miflion which he feemed fo frankly to oifer them. chap. 
James was at this time but eleven years of age ; yet .^^^^^^J^^ 
Morton, having fecured himfelf, as he imagined, by ,5^0. 
a general pardon, refigned his authority into the 
hands of the_ king, who pretended to conduct, in his 
own name, the adminiflration of the kingdom. The 
regent retired from the government ; and feemed to 
employ himfelf entirely in the care of his domeflic 
affairs ; but, either tired with this tranquillity, which 
appeared infipid after the agitations of ambition, or 
thinking it time to throw off diffimulation, he came 
again to court ; acquired an afcendant in the coun- 
cil ; and though he refumed not the title of regent, 
governed with the fame authority as before. The 
oppofite party, after holding feparate conventions, 
took to arms, on pretence of delivering their prince 
from captivity, and reltoring him to the free exercife 
of his government : Queen Elizabeth interpofed by 
her ambaffador, fir Robert Bowes, and mediated 
an agreement between the faftions : Morton kept 
poffellion of the government ; but his enemies were 
numerous and vigilant ; and his authority feemed to 
become every day more precarious. 

The count d'Aubigney, of the houfe of Lenox, 
coufm-german to the king's father, had been born 
and educated in France ; and being a young man 
of good addrefs and a fweet difpofition, he appeared 
to the duke of Guife a proper inftrument for detach- 
ing James from the Englifh intereft, and connecting 
him with his mother and her relations. He no fooner 
appeared at Stirling, where James refided, than he 
acquired the affections of the young monarch ; and 
joining his intereft with thofe of James Stuart of 
the houle of Ochiltree, a man of profligate manners, 
who had acquired the king's favour, he employed 
himfelf, under the appearance of play and amufe- 
ment, in inftilling into the tender mind of the prince 
new femiments of politics and government. He re» 

Qji- prelented 



232 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, prefented to him the injuftice which had been done 
,^^^^^_^^^,__^^ to Mary in her depofition, and made him entertain 
1^80. thoughts either of refigning the crown into her hands, 
or of aiTociating her with him in the adminiflration '. 
Ehzabeth, alarmed at the danger which might enfue 
from the prevalence of this intereft in Scotland, fent 
anew fir Robert Bowes to Stirling ; and accufmg 
d'Aubigney, now created earl of Lenox, of an at- 
tachment to the French, warned James againft enter- 
taining fiich fufpicious and dangerous connexions '", 
The king excufed himfelf, by fir Alexander Hume, 
his ambalfador ; and Lenox, finding that the queen 
had openly declared againft him, was farther con- 
firmed in his intentions of overturning the Englilh 
intereft, and particularly of ruining Morton, who 
was regarded as the head of it. That nobleman was 
arrefted in council, accufed as an accomplice in the 
late king's murder, committed to prifon, brought to 
trial, and condemned to fuffer as a traitor. He con- 
feiled that Bothwel had communicated to him the 
defign, had pleaded Mary's confent, and had defired 
his concurrence ; but he denied that he himfelf had 
ever expreifed any approbation of the crime ; and, 
in excufe for his concealing it, he alledged the danger 
of revealing the fecret, either to Henry, who had no 
refolution nor conftancy, or to Mary, who appeared 
to be an accomplice in the murder ". Sir Thomas 
Randolph was fent by the queen to intercede in fa- 
vour of Morton ; and that ambalfador, not content 
with dilcharging this duty of his funftion, engaged, 
by his perfuafion, the earls of Argyle, Montrofe, 
Angus, Marre, and Glencarne, to enter into a con- 
federacy for protecting, even by force of arms, the 
life of the prifoner. The more to overawe that 
nobleman's enemies, Elizabeth ordered forces to be 

^ Digges, p. 412. 4.2?. Melvil, p. 130. «" Spotfwood, p. 309, 
> Ibid. p. 314. Ciawford, p. 333. Moyfc's Memoirs, p. 54. 

alTemble^ 



ELIZABETH. 233 

afTembled on the borders of England ; but this ex- c H A p. 
pedlent ferved only to haften his fentence and exe- ,il^L^ 
cution ". Morton died with that conftancy and refor- , jg^, 
lution, which had attended him through all the va- 
rious events of his life ; and left a reputation, which 
was lefs difputed with regard to abilities than probity 
and virtue. But this conclufion of the fcene hap- 
pened not till the fubfequent year. 

Elizabeth was, during this period, extremely Span!(h 
anxious on account of every revolution in Scotland ; »ff^'"* 
both becaufe that country alone, not being feparated 
from England by fea, and bordering on all the ca- 
tholic and malcontent counties, afforded her enemies 
a fafe and eafy method of attacking her ; and becaufe 
{he was fenfiOle, that Mary, thinking herfelf aban- 
doned by the French monarch, had been engaged 
by the Guifes to have recourl'e to the powerful pro- 
te<5tion of Philip, who, though he had not yet come 
to an open rupture with the queen, was every da)^ 
both by the injuries which he committed and fuffer- 
ed, more exalperated againft her. That he might 
retaliate the affiftance v/hich fhe gave to his rebels in 
the Low Countries, he had fent, under the name oF 
the pope P, a body of feven hundred Spaniards and 
Itahans into Ireland ; where the inhabitants, always 
turbulent, and difcontented with the Engliih govern- 
ment, were now more alienated by religious pre- 
judices, and were ready to join every invader. The 
Spanifti general, San Jofepho, built a fort in Kerry ; 
and being there befieged by the earl of Ormond, 
prefident of Munfter, who was foon after joined by 
lord Gray, the deputy, he made a weak and cow- 
ardly defence. After fome affaults, feebly fuftained, 
he furrendered at difcretion ; and Gray, who com- 
manded but a fmall force, finding himfelf encum- 
bered with fo many prifoners, put all the Spaniards 

o Spotfwood, p. 31a. P Digges, p. 359. 370. 

and 



234 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, and Italians to the fword without mercy, and hanged 
^^llj about fifteen hundred of the Irifii : A cruelty which 
1580. gave great difpleafure to Elizabeth '^. 
Sir Francis When the Englifh ambafTador made complaints 
Drake. of tliis iuvafion, lie was anfwered by like complaints 
of the piracies committed by Francis Drake, a bold 
feaman, who had aflaulted the Spaniards in the place 
where they deemed themfelves moll fecure, in the 
new world. This man, fprung from mean parents in 
the county of Devon, having acquired confiderable 
riches by depredations made in the iithmus of Pana- 
ma, and having there gotten a fight of the Pacific 
Ocean, v/as fo llimulated by ambition and avarice, 
that he fcrupied not to employ his whole fortune in 
a nev/ adventure through thofe feas, fo much un- 
known at that time to ail the European nations \ 
By means of fir Chriftopher Hatton, then vice- 
chamberlain, a great favourite of the queen's, he ob- 
tained her confent and approbation ; and he fet fail 
from Plymouth in 1577, with four fhips and a pin- 
nace, on board of which were one hundred and fixty- 
four able failors'. He palfed into the South Sea by 
the Straits of Magellan, and attacking the Spaniards, 
who expected no enemy in thofe quarters, he took 
many rich prizes, and prepared to return with the 
booty which he had acquired. Apprehenfive of being 
intercepted by the enemy, if he took the fame way 
hom.ewards, by which he had reached the Pacific 
Ocean, he attempted to find a pall'age by the north 
of Cahfornia ; and failing in that enterprife, he fet 
fail for the Eaft Indies, and returned fafely this year 
by the Cape of Good Hope. He was the firlt 
Enghfhman who failed round the globe ; and the 
firft commander in chief: For Magellan, whofe Ihip 

<3 Camden, p. 47?. Cox's Hift. of Ireland, p. 368. 
T Camden, p. 4.78. Stowe, p. 689. 

» Camden, p. 4.78. Hakluyt's Voyages, vol. iii. p. 730. 748. 
Turchas's Filgiim, vol. i. p. 46. 

executed 



ELIZABETH. 235 

executed the fame adventure, died in his paffage. chap. 
His name became celebrated on account of fo bold i^ll, 
and formnate an attempt; but many, a; prehending ,^go. 
the refentment of the Spaniards, endeavoured to per- 
fuade the queen, that it would be more prudent to 
dilavow the enterprife, to punifh Dra'.e, and to re- 
flore the trcafure. But Elizabeth, who admired va- 
lour, and was allured by the profped: of (liaring in 
the booty, determined to countenance that gallant 
failor : She conferred on him the honour of knight- 
hood, and accepted of a banquet from him at Dept- 
ford, on board the fhip which had atcliieved fo me- 
morable a voysge. When Philip's ambalTador, Men- 
doza, exclaimed againft Drake's piracies, Ihe told 
him, that the Spaniards, by arrogating a right to the 
whole new world, and excluding thence all other 
European nations, who fhould fail thither, even with 
a view of exercifmg the moft lawful commerce, na- 
turally tempted others to make a violent irruption 
into ihcfe countries '. To pacify, however, the ca- 
tholic monarch, (he caufed part of the booty to be 
reltored to Pedro Sebura, a Spaniard, who pretended 
to be agent for the merchants whom Drake had 
fpvoiled. Having learned afterwards, that Philip had 
feized the money, and had employed part of it 
again it herfelf in Ireland, part of it in rhe pay of the 
prince of Parma's troops, fhe determined to make 
no more refiitutions. 

There was another caufe, ^which induced the 1581. 
queen to take this refolution : She was in fuch want 
of money, that fhe was obliged to alTemble a par- 
liament, a measure, which, as fhe herfelf openly de- 
clared, file never embraced, except when conftrained 
by the necelhty of her affairs. The parhament, be- 16'ti Jan. 
fides granting her a fupply of one fubfidy and two ^ P^-i'^- 
fifteenths, enaded fome ftatutes for the fecurity of 
her government, chiefly againfl the attempts of the 

* Camderij p. 480. 

catholicSo 



1^6 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, catholics. Whoever, in any way, reconciled any one 
t^^lf to the church of Rome, or was himfelf reconciled, 
4581. '^^''^^ declared to be guilty of treafon ; to fay mafs was 
fubjefted to the penalty of a year's imprifonment, 
and a fine of two hundred n^arks ; the being prefent 
was punifliable by a year's iriiprifonnientj and a fine 
of one hundred marks : A fine of twenty pounds 
a month was impofed on every one who continued, 
during that time, abfent from church ". To utter 
flanderous or feditious words againfl the queen was 
punifhable, for the firft offence, with the pillory and 
Jofs of ears ; the fecond offence was declared felony : 
The writing or printing of fuch words was felony 
even on the firft offence "'. The puritans prevailed 
fQ far as to have farther applications made for re- 
formation in religion "" : And Paul Wentworth, bro- 
ther to the member of that name who had diftin- 
guiflied himfelf in the preceding feflion, moved, That 
the commons, from their own authority, fhould ap- 
point a general fafl and prayers : A motion, to which 
the houfe unwarily affented. For this prefumption, 
they were feverely reprimanded by a meffage from 
the queen, as encroaching on the royal prerogative 
and fupremacy ; and they were obliged to fubmit^ 
and alk forgivenefs K 

The queen and parliament were engaged to pafs 
thefe fevere laws againfl the catholics, by fome late 
difcoveries of the treafonable practices of their priefts. 
When the ancient worfliip was fuppreffed, and the 
reformation introduced into the univerfities-, the king 
of Spain reflected, that, as fome fpecies of literature 
was neceffary for I'upporting thefe dotlrines and con- 
troverfies, the Romifh communion mufl decay in 
England, if no means were found to give erudition 
to the ecclefiaflics ; and for this reafon, he founded 
a feminary at Douay, where the catholics fent their 
children, chiefly fuch as were intended for the 

" z\ Eliz, cap. I, " Ibid. cap. 2. 

» CEwef, -p. joz. y Ibid. p. 284-, 285. 

prieflhood^ 



ELIZABETH. 237 

prlefthood, in order to receive the rudiments of C hap. 
their education. The cardinal of Lorraine imi- ^^^^^ZLj 
tated this example, by erefting a Hke feminary in ^g,, 
his diocefe of Rheims ; and though Rome was 
fomewhat diftant, the pope would not neglect to 
adorn, by a foundation of the fame nature, that ca- 
pital of orthodoxy. Thefe feminaries, founded with 
lb hoftile an intention, fent over every year a colony 
of priefts, who maintained the catholic fuperilition 
in its full height of bigotry ; and being educated 
with a view to the crown of martyrdom, were not 
deterred, either by danger or fatigue, from main- 
taining and propagating their principles. They 
infufed into all their votaries an extreme hatred 
againft the queen, whom they treated as an ufurp- 
er, a fchifmatic, a heretic, a perfecutor of the or- 
thodox,, and one folemnly and publicly anathema- 
tifed by the holy father. Sedition, rebellion, fbme- 
times aflaffination, were the expedients by which 
they intended to efi'ecl their purpoies againft her ; 
and the fevere reftraint, not to fay perfecution, un- 
der which the catholics laboured, made them the 
more willingly receive, from their ghoftly fathers, 
fuch violent doctrines. 

These Seminaries were all of them under the di- 
rection of the jefuits, a new order of regular priefts 
erected in Europe, when the court of Rome per- 
ceived, that the lazy monks and beggarly friars, 
who fufficed in times of ignorance, were no longer 
able to defend the ramparts of the church, affailed 
on every fide, and that the inquifitive fpirit of the 
age required a fociety more aftive and more learn- 
ed, to oppofe its dangerous progrefs. Thefe men, 
as they ftood foremoft in the conteft againft the 
proteftants, drew on them the extreme animofity of 
that whole feft ; and by affuming a fuperiorlty over 
the other more numerous and more ancient orders 
of their own communion, were even expofed to the 
envy of their brethren : So that it is no wonder, if 

the 



238 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, the blame, to which their principles and" condu£^ 
xr.i. might be expofed, has, in many inftances, been 
J g^^ much exaggerated. This reproach, however, they 
mud bear from pofterity, that, by the very nature of 
their inllitution, they were engaged to pervert learn- 
ing, the only effeftual remedy againfl: fuperftition, 
into a nourifhment of that infirmity ; and, as their 
erudition was chiefly of the ecclefiaftical and fcho- 
laftic kind (though a few members have cultivated 
polite Hterature), they were only the more enabled, 
by that acquiiition, to refine away the plained dic- 
tates of morality, and to ereft a regular fyftem of 
cafuiftry, by which prevarication, perjury, and every 
crime, when i ierved their ghoftly purpofes, might 
be jullified and defended. 

The jefuits, as devoted fervants to the court of 
Rome, exalted the prerogative of the fovereign 
- pontiff above all earthly power ; and, by maintaining 
his authority of depofmg kings, fet no bounds either 
to his fpiritual or temporal jurifditlion. This doc- 
trine became fo prevalent among the zealous ca- 
tholics in England, that the excommunication ful- 
minated againft Elizabeth excited many fcruples of 
a fmgular kind, to which it behoved the holy father 
to provide a remedy.^ The bull of Pius, in abfolv- 
ing the fubjecls from their oaths of allegiance, com- 
manded them to refift the queen's ufurpation ; and 
many Romanifts were apprehenfive, that, by this 
claufe, they were obliged in confcience, even though 
no favourable opportunity offered, to rebel againfl 
her, and that no dangers or difficulties could free 
them from this indifpenfable duty. But Parfons and 
Campion, two jefuits, were fent over with a miti- 
gation and explanation of the doctrine ; and they 
taught their difciples, that though the bull was for 
ever binding on Elizabeth and her partifans, it did 
not oblige the catholics to obedience, except when 
the fovereign pontiff Ihould think proper, by a new 

fummons. 



Il L I Z A B E T H. 239 

fummons, to require it "". Campion was afterwards c hap. 
detefted in trealbnable praftices ; and being put to ^il^^flj 
the rack, and confefling his guilt, he was publicly i^g,, 
executed. His execution was ordered at the very 
time when the duke of Anjou was in England, and 
profecuted, with the greatefl appearance of fuccefs, 
his marriage with the queen ; and this feverity was 
probably intended to appeafe her proteftant fubjefts, 
and to fatisfy them, that whatever meafures (he 
might purfue, fine never would depart from the 
principles of the reformation. 

The duke of Alencon, now created duke of Negotia. 
Anjou, had never entirely dropped his pretenfions I,'°a"ri°^5. 
to Elizabeth ; and that princefs, though her fuitor with the 
was near twenty-five years younger than herfelf, and ^^^.^ °^ 
had no knowledge of her perfon, but by piftures or 
defcriptions, was llili pieaf'ed with the image, which 
his addreifes afforded her, of love and tendernefs. 
The duke, in order to forward his fuit, belides em- 
ploying his brother's ambaifRdor, fent over Simier, 
an agent of his own ; an artful man, of an agree- 
able converfation, ^ ,0, foon remarking the queen's 
humour, amufed her with gay difcourfe, and inftead 
of ferious political reafonings, which, he found, only 
awakened her ambition, and hurt his mailer's in- 
terefls, he introduced every moment all the topics 
of paffion and of gallantry. The pleafure which fhe 
found in this man's company, foon produced a 
familiarity between them ; and amidft the greateft 
hurry of bufinefs, her moft confidential miniilers 
had not fuch ready accefs to her, as had Simier, 
who, on pretence of negodation, entertained her 
with accounts of the tender attachment borne her 
by the duke of Anjou. The earl of Leicefler, who 
had never before been alarmed with any courtfhip 
payed her, and who always trufled, that her love 
of dominion would prevail over her inclination to 



5^ Camden, p. 477, 



marriage. 



24© HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, marriage, began to apprehend, that (he was at lall 
^^J^^* caught in her own fnare, and that the artful encou- 
1581. ragement which ihe had given to this young fuitor 
had unawares engaged her afFedions. To render 
Simier odious, he availed himfelf of the credulity 
of the times, and fpread reports, that that minifter 
had gained an afcendant over the queen, not by any 
natural principles of her conditution, but by incan- 
tations and love potions. Simier, in revenge, en- 
deavoured to difcredit Leicefter with the queen ; 
and he revealed to her a fecret, which none of her 
courtiers dared to difclofe, that this nobleman was 
fecretly, without her confent, married to the widow 
of the earl of EiTex ; an aftion which the queen in- 
terpreted either to proceed from want of refpeO: to 
her, or as a violation of their mutual attachment ; 
and which fo provoked her, that Ihe threatened to 
fend him to the Tower \ The quarrel went fo far 
between Leicefter and the French agent, that the 
former was fufpefted of having employed one Tu- 
dor, a bravo, to take away, the life of his enemy; 
and the queen thought it neceffary, by proclamation, 
to take Simier under her immediate protection. It 
happened, that while Elizabeth was rowed in her 
barge on the Thames, attended by Simier, and fome 
of her courtiers, a fhot was fired which wounded one 
of the bargemen ; but the queen finding, upon in- 
quiry, that the piece had been difcharged by acci- 
dent, gave the perfon his liberty, without farther 
punilliment. So far was flie from entertaining any 
fufpicion againft her people, that fhe was often heard 
to fay, " That fhe would lend credit to nothing 
*' againfl them, which parents would not believe of 
" their own children V* 

The dukeof Anjou , encouraged by the accounts fent 
him of the queen's prepofTefTions in his favour, paid 
her fecretly a vifit at Greenwich 5 and after fome con- 

« Camden, p. 471. ^ Idem ibid, 

ference 



ELIZABETH. ^41 

fcrence with her, the purport of which is not CHAP, 
known, he departed. It appeared that, though ^^J^^^ 
his figure was not advantageous, he had loft no ,,3,, 
ground by being perfonally known to her ; and 
foon after, fhe commanded Burleigh, now treafurer, 
Sulfex, Leicefter, Bedford, Lincoln, Katton, and 
fecretary Walfmgham, to concert with the French 
ambaffadors the terms of the intended contraft of 
marriage. Henry had font over on ttiis occafion a 
fplendid embalfy, confifting of Francis de Bourbon, 
prince dauphin, and many confiderable noblemen ; 
and as the queen had in a manner the powef of pre- 
fcribing what terms llie pleafed, the articles w^ere 
foon fettled with the Englifh commiHioners. It was 
agreed that the miarriage fliould be celebrated within 
fix weeks after the ratification of the articles ; that 
the duke and his retinue iliould have the exercife of 
their religion ; that after the marriage he ihould 
bear the title of King, but the adminiftration re- 
main folely in the queen ; that their children, male 
or female, fhould fucceed to the crown of England ; 
that if there be tv/o males, the elder, in cafe of 
Henry's death v/ithout iifue, fhould be king of 
France, the younger of England ; that if there be 
but one male, and he fucceed to the crown of 
France, he fliould be oblioed to refide in England 
eight months every two years ; that» the laws and 
cuftoms of England fhould be preferved inviolate ; 
and that no foreigner fhould be pronioted by the 
duke to any oflice in England ^. 

1'kese articles, providing for the fecurity of 
England, in cafe of its annexation to the crown of 
France, opened but a difmal profpect to the Eng- 
lifh ; had not the age of Elizabeth, who v/as now' 
in her forty-ninth year, contributed very much to 
allay their apprehenfions of this nature. The queen 
alio, as a proof of hei ftill remaining uncertainty, 

^ Camden, p. 4'('^v 

Vol. V. R added 



24^ HISTORY OF ENGLAlsfD. 

CHAP, added a claufe, that flie was not bound to complete- 
the marriage, till farther articles, which were not 
fpecified, fliould be agreed on between the parties, 
and till the king of France be certified of this agree- 
ment. Soon after, the queen fent over Walfnigham, 
as ambaifador to France, in order to form clofer 
connections with Henry, and enter into a league 
ofFenfive and defenfive againll the increafmg power 
and dangerous ufurpations of Spain. The French 
king, who had been extremely difturbed with the 
unquiet fpirit, the reftlefs ambition, the enterprifmg 
yet timid and inconifant difpofition of Anjou, had 
already fought to free the kingdom from his in- 
trigues, by opening a fcene for his adivity in Flan- 
ders ; and having allowed him to embrace the pro- 
teclion of the States, had fecretly fupplied him with 
men and money for the undertaking. The profpecl 
of fettling him in England, was for a like realbn very 
agreeable to that monarch ; and he was defirous to 
cultivate, by every expedient, the favourable fen- 
timents which Elizabeth feemed to entertain towards 
him. But this princefs, though flie had gone far- 
ther in her amorous " dalliance than could be julli- 
fied or accounted for by any principles of policy, 
was not yet determined to carry matters to a final 
conclufion ; and fhe confined Walfinoham in his 
inflruftions to negotiating conditions of a mutual 
alliance between France and England ''. Flenry with 
reluctance fubmitted to hold conferences on that 
fubjed; ; but no fooner had Walfingham begun to 
fettle the terms of alliance, than he was informed 
that the queen, forefeeing hodility with Spain to be 
the refult of this confederacy, had declared that fhe 
would prefer the marriage with the war, before the 
war without the marriage*. 1 he French court, 
pleafed with this change of refolution, broke off the 
conferences concerning the league, and opened a 



c Digges, J). 3557. 396.408. 4.26. 


•* IbiJ. p. 352. 


e Ibid. p. 375. 591, 




10 


negotia- 



ELIZABETH. 243: 

iitgotiatlon for the raiirriage ^ But matters had CHAP, 
not long proceeded in this train before the queen vjlhi^^ 
again declared for the league in preference to the i^g,. ' 
marriage, and ordered Walfmgham to renew the 
conferences for that purpofe. Before he had leifure 
to bring this point to maturity, he was interrupted 
by a new change of refolutlon ^ ; and not only the 
court of France, but Walhngham himfelf, Burleigh, 
and all the wifeft minifters of Elizabeth, were in 
amazement, doubtful where this conteft between in- 
clination and reafon, love and ambition, would at 
iaft terminate ^ 

In the courfe of this affair, Elizabeth felt another 
variety of intentions, from a new conteft between 
her reafon and her ruling paflions. The duke of 
Anjou expefted from her fome money, by which he 
might be enabled to open the campaign in Flanders ; 
and the queen herfelf, though her frugality made 
her limg reluctant, was fenfible that this fupply was 
necelfary ; and flie was at lad induced, after much 
hefiiation, to comply with his requeft '. She fent 
him a prefent of a hundred thouiand crowns ; by 
which, joined to his own demefnes, and the aflift- 
ance of his brother and the queen-dovv'ager, he 
levied an army, and took the field againft the prince 
of Parma. Ke was fuccefsful in raifmg the fiege 
of Cambray ; and being chofen by the States 
governor of the Netherlands, he put his army into ' 
winter quarters, and came over to England in order 
to profecute his fuit to the queen. The reception 
which he met with made him expect entire fuccefs, 
and gave him hopes that Elizabeth had furmounted 
all icruples, and was finally determined to make 
choice of him for her hulband. In the miidil of the 
pomp which attended the anniverfary of her core- Nov. 17. 

*' Diggcs, p. 392. g Ihid p. 408. ^ See note [Q^"| at 

the end ot the volume. » Digges, p. 357. 387, 38S, 4-'9. 

416. 4.39. Rymer, xv. p. 793. 

R 2 nation. 



ft44 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP. Ration, {he was feen, after long and Intimate dif- 
'^^li. courfe with him, to take a ring from her own finger, 
J. 2.1. and to put it upon his ; and all the fpeftators con- 
cluded, that in this ceremony flie had given him a 
promiie of marriage, and was even defirous of fig- 
nifying her intentions to all the world. St. Alde- 
gonde, ambaifador from the States, difpatched im- 
mediately a letter to his mailers, informing them of 
this great event ; and the inhabitants of Antwerp, 
who as well as the other Flemings regarded the 
queen as a kind of tutelar divinity, teflified their 
joy by bonfires and the difcharge of their great ord- 
nance ''. A puritan of Lincoln's-Inn had written a 
paflionate book, which he intitled, " The Gulph in, 
" which England will be fwallowed by the French 
" marriage." He was apprehended and profecuted 
by order of the queen, and was condemned to lofe 
his right hand as a libeller. Such was the conftancy 
and loyalty of the man, that immediately after the 
fentence was executed, he took off his hat with his 
other hand, and waving it over his head, cried, 
" God fave the queen.*' 

But notwithilanding this attachment which Eli- 
zabeth fo openly difcovered to the duke of Anjou, 
the combat of her fentiments was not entirely over ; 
and her ambition, as well as prudence, roufing itfelf 
by intervals, dill filled her bread with doubt and 
hefitation. Almolt all the courtiers whom (he 
trufted and favoured, Leicefter, Hatton, and Wal- 
fmgham, difcovered an extreme averfion to the 
marriage ; and the ladies of her bed-chamber made 
no fcruple of oppoling her refoliltion with the moft 
zealous remonft ranees '. Among other enemies to 
the match, fir Philip, fon of fir Henry Sidney, de- 
puty of Ireland, and nephev/ to Leicefter, a young 
man the moft accomplilhed of the age, declared 
himfelf : And he ufed the freedom to write her a 

'-^ Camden, p. 4.86, Thuan. lib. 74, » Camden, p. 486. 

letter. 



ELIZABETH. 



245 



letter, in which he di.Tuaded her from her prefent chap, 
relolution, with an unufuul elegance of exprcffion, ^^Jl^ 
as well as force of reafoning. He told her, that the ,381. 
fecurlty of her government depended entirely on the 
affeftions of her proteftant fubjeQs ; and Ihe could 
not, by any meafure, more effectuallv difguft them, 
than by efpoufing a prince who was Jon of the per- 
fidious Catherine, brother to the cruel and perfidious 
Charles, and who had himfelf imbrued his haiids in 
the blood of the innocent and defenceleis protellants : 
That the catholics were her mortal enemies, and 
believed either that fhe had originally ufurped the 
crown, or was now lawfully depofed by the pope's 
bull of excommunication ; and nothing had ever fo 
much elevated their hopes as the profpecl of her 
marriage with the duke of Anjou : That her chief 
fecurity at prefent againft the eiforts of fo nume- 
rous, rich, and united a faction, was, that they pof- 
felfed no head who could conduct their dangerous 
enterprifes ; and fhe herfelf was rafhly fupplying 
that defe6l, by giving an interefl in the kingdom 
to a prince v/hofe education had zealoufly at- 
tached him to that communion : That though he 
was a ft ranger to the blood royal of England, the 
difpofitions of men were now fuch that they pre- 
ferred the religious to the civil connexions ; and 
were more inliuenced by fympathy in theological 
opinions, than by the principles of legal and here- 
ditary government : That the duke himfelf had dif^ 
covered a very reftlefs and turbulent fpirit ; and 
having often violated his loyalty to his elder brother 
and his fovereign, there remained no hopes that he 
would paifively fubmit to a woman whom he might 
in quality of hufband think himfelf entitled to 
command : That the French nation, fo populous, 
fo much abounding in foldiers, fo full of nobility 
who were devoted to arms, and for fome time accuf- 
tomed to ferve for plunder, would fupply him with 
partifans dangerous to a people unwarhke and de- 

R 3 fencelefs 



24^5 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

C H A P. fencelefs like the generality of her fubjeds : That 
t]^}^b. the plain and honourable path which rne had fol- 
J58:. lowed, of cultivating the affeftions of her people, 
had hitherto rendered her reign fecure and happy ; 
and however her enemies might feem to multiply 
upon her, the fame invincible rampart was flill able 
to proted: and defend her : That fo long as the 
throne of France was filled by Henry or his pofte- 
rity, it was in vain to hope that the ties of blood 
would enfure the amity of that kingdom, preferably 
to the maxims of policy or the prejudices of religion ; 
and if ever the crown devolved on the duke of 
Anjou, the conjunction of France and England 
would prove a burden rather than a protection to 
the latter kingdom : That the example of her fifler 
Mary was fufficient to initruCt her in the danger of 
fuch connexions ; and to prove that the affe6lion 
and confidence of the Englilh could never be main- 
tained where they had fuch reafon to apprehend that 
their interefts would every mom.ent be facrificed to 
thofe of a foreign and hoftile nation : That notwith- 
ftanding thefe great inconveniencies, difcovered by 
pafl experience, the houfe of Burgundy, it mull be 
confelTed, was more popular in the nation than the 
family of France ; and what was of chief moment, 
Philip was of the fame communion with Mary, and 
was connefted v/ith her by this great band of interefl 
and aiFeftion : And that however the queen might 
remain childlefs, even though old age fhould grow 
upon her, the fmgular felicity and glory of her reign 
would preferve her from contempt ; the alieftions of 
her fubjects, and thole of all the proteftants in Eu- 
rope, would defend her from danger ; and her own 
prudence, without other aid or afliltance, would baffle 
all the efforts of her mofl malignant enemies "". 

These refiedtions kept the queen in great anxiety 
and irrefolution ; and fhe was obferved to pafs feveral 

w Letters of the Sidneys, vol. i. p. a?7> & feq. Cabala, p. 363. 

nights 



ELIZABETH. 247 

nights without any fleep or repofe. At laft her C 11 A P. 
fettled habiis of prudence and ambition prevailed '^^llj 
over her temporary inclination ; and having fent for ,^gj^ 
the duke ol Anjou, flie had a long conference with 
him in private, where fhe was fuppofed to have 
made him apologies for breaking her former engage- 
ments. He exprelVed great difguft on his leaving 
her ; threw away the ring which Ihe had given him ; 
and uttered many curfes on the mutability of wo- 
men, and of iflanJers ". Soon after, he went over 
to his government of the Neiherlands ; loft the con- 
fidence of the Slates by a rafh and violent attempt 
on their liberties ; was expelled that country ; retired 
into France ; and there died. The queen, by timely 
refleftion, faved herfelf from the numerous mifchiefs 
which muft have attended fo imprudent a marriage : 
And the did: raclcd ftate of the French monarchy pre- 
vented her from feeling any effefts of that refent- 
ment which flie had reafon to dread from the affront 
fo wantonly put upon that royal family. 

The anxiety of the queen from the attempts of ^^^ts of 
the Englifh catholics never ceafed during the whole 
courfe of her reign ; but the variety of revolutions 
which happened in all the neighbouring kingdoms, 
was the fource fometimes of her hopes, fometimes 
of her apprehenfions. This year the aft'airs of Scot- 
land ftrongly engaged her attention. The influence 
which the earl of Lenox, and James Stuart, who 
now aflumed the title of earl of Arran, had acquired 
over the young king, was but a flendcr foundation 
of authority ; while the generality of the nobles and 
all the preachers were fo much difcontented with 
their adminiftration. The aiTembly of the church 
appointed a folemn faft ; of which one of the avovt^ed 
reafons was the danger to which the king was ex- 
pofed from the company of wicked perfons " : And 
Qii that day the pulpits refounded with declamations 

1 Camden, p. 4.86. « Spotfwood, p. 319. 

R 4 againfl 



248 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, agalnft Lenox, Arran, and all the prefent counfel- 

'^^II, lors. When the minds of the people were fuffici- 

j^gi. ently prepared by thefe leclures. a confplracy of the 

nobility was formed, probably with the concurrence 

Ai'ga!l2 3, of Elizabeth, for feizing the perfon of James at 
Ruthven, a feat of the earl of Gowry's ; and th? 
defign being kept fecret, fuceeded without any op- 
pofition. The leaders in this enterprife were, the 
earl of Gowry himfelf, the earl of Marre, the lords 
Lindefey and Boyd, the mailers of Glamis and Oli- 
phant, the abbots of Dumfermline, Paifley, and 
Cambufkenneth. The king wept when he found 
himfelf detained a prifoner ; but the mafter of Gla- 
mis faid, " No matter for his tears : Better that boys 
" weep than bearded men :" An expreffion which 
James could never afterwards forgive •". But not- 
■withflanding his refentment, he found it neceifary 
to fubmit to the prefent neceffity. He pretended 
an entire acquiefcence in the conduft of the affo- 
ciators ; acknowledged the detention of his perfon 
to be acceptable fervice ; and agreed to fummon 
both an affembly of the church and a convention of 
eflates, in order to ratify that enterprife. 

The alTembly, though they had eflabliflied it ay 
an inviolable rule, that the king on no account and 
under no pretence fliouid ever intermeddle in eccle- 
fiailical matters, made no fcruplc oi taking civil 
affairs under their cognizance, and of deciding on 
this occafion, tliat the attempt of the confpirators 
was acceptable to all that feared God, or tendered 
the prefervation of the king's perfon, and profperous 
flate of the realm. They even enjoined all the 
clergy to recommend thefe fentiments from the pul- 
pit ; and they threatened with ecclefiaftical cenlures 
every man who fliould oppofe the authority of the 
confederated lords ''. The convention being com- 
pofed chiefly of thefe lords themfelves, added their 

? SiJOtfwood, p. 3SO, *l Ibidi p. 322. 

fanfllon 



ELIZABETH. 



249 




fan<5lIon to thefe proceedings. Arran was confined 
a priioner in his own houfe : Lenox, though he had 
power to refifl, yet rather than raife a civil war, or be ^"Ts^z^ 
the caufe of bloodfhed ', chofe to retire into France, 
where he foon after died. He perfevered to the lall 
jn the proteilant rehgion, to which James had con- 
verted him, but which the Scottifli clergy could 
never be perfuaded that he had fmcerely embraced. 
The king fent for his family, reflorcd his fon to his 
paternal honours and eftate, took care to elfablifli 
the fortunes of all his other children ; and to his laft 
moments never forgot the early friendfhip which he 
had borne their father : A flrong proof of the good 
difpofitions of that prince °. 

No fooner was this revolution known in England, 
than the queen fent fir Kenry Gary and fir Robert 
Bowes to James, in order to congratulate him on his 
dehverance from the pernicious counlels of Lenox 
and Arran ; to exhort lim not to refent the feeming 
violence committed c.ui him by the confederated 
lords; and to jirocure from him permiilion for the 
return of the earl of Angus, who ever fmce Morton's 
fall had lived in England. They eafily prevailed 
Ui procuring the recal of Angus ; and as James 
fuipecled that Elizabeth had not been entirely un- 
acquainted with the projed; of his detention, he 
thought proper before the EngliHi ambaffadors to 
diffemble his refentment acrainft the authors of it. 

o 

Soon after, La Mothe-Fenelon, and Menneville, 1583. 
appeared as ambaffadors from France : Their er- 
rand was to inquire concerning the fituation of the 
king, make profellions of their mafler's friendlliip, 
ponnrm the ancient league with France, and pro- 
cure an accommodation between James and the 
aueen of Scots. This lafl propofal gave great 



•• Hcylin's Hift. Prefbyter. p. 127, Spotfwood. 
s Spollwood, p. 328. 



iimbrage 



»583. 



250 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, umbrage to the clergy ; and the affembly voted the 
"^^^' . fettling of terms between the mother and fon to be 
a moil wicked undertaking. The pulpits refounded 
with dechunations againft the French ambalfadors ; 
particularly Fenelon, whom they called the meffenger 
of the bloody murderer, meaning the duke of Guife ; 
And as that minifter, being knight of the Holy 
Ghofl, wore a white crofs on his flioulder, they 
commonly denominated . it in contempt the badge 
of Antichrift. The king endeavoured, though in 
vain, to reprefs thefe infolent refleclions ; but in 
order to make the ambailadors fome compenfation, 
he defired the magiftrates of Edinburgh to give 
them a fplendid dinner before their departure. To 
prevent this entertainment, the clergy appointed that 
very day for a public fail ; and finding that their 
orders were not regarded, they employed their fer- 
mons in thundering curfes on the magiflrates, who, 
by the king's direction, had put this mark of refpect 
on the ambalfadors. They even purfued them after- 
wards with the cenfures of the church ; and it was 
with difficulty they were prevented from ilTuing the 
fentence of excommunication againft them, on acr 
count of their fubmiffion to roval, preferably td 
clerical, authority '. 

What increafed their alarm with regard to an 
accommodation between James and Mary was, that 
the Encrlifh ambalfadors feemed to concur with the 
French in this propofal ; and the clergy were fo ig- 
norant as to believe the fmcerity of the profeffions 
made by the former. The queen of Scots had often 
made overtures to Elizabeth, which had been en- 
tirely neglected ; but hearing of James's detention. 
Letter of fhe wrote a letter in a more pathetic and more fpi- 
f,^;" y "", rited (train than ufual ; craving the affift ance of that 

^ Spotfwood, p. 37.4^. 

princefft 




ELIZABETH. '551 

pnncefs both for her own and her fon*s liberty. She 
laid, that the account of the prince's captivity had 
excited her moft tender concern ; and the experience 
which fhe herfelf, dining fo many years, had of the 
extreme infehcity attending that fituation, had made 
her the more apprehenfive left a like fate fnould 
purfue her unhappy offspring : That the k^ng train 
of injuftice which ihe had undergone, the calumnies 
to which ihe had been expofed, were fo grievous, that 
finding no place for right or truth among men, fhe 
was reduced to make her laft appeal to Heaven, the 
only competent tribunal between princes of equal 
jurifdidion, degree, and dignity : That after her 
rebellious fubjeds, fecretly inftigated by Elizabeth's 
minifters, had expelled her the throne, had confined 
her in prifon, had purfued her with arms, flie had 
voluntarily thrown hcrfclf under the protedion of 
England ; fatally allured by thofe reiterated profef- 
fions of amity which had been made her, and by 
her confidence in the gentrofity of a friend, an ally, 
jmd a kinfwoman : That, not content with exclud- 
ing her from her prefence, with I'upporting the 
umrpers of her throne, with contributing to the de- 
ftruftion of her faithful fubjeOs, Elizabeth had re- 
duced her to a worfe captivity than that from which 
fhe had efcaped, and had made her this cruel return 
for the unlimited confidence which (lie had repofed 
in her : That though her refentment of fuch I'evere 
ufage had never carried her farther than to ufe fome 
difappointed efforts for her deliverance, unhappy 
for herfelf, and fatal to others, fhe found the rigours 
of confinement daily multiplied upon her ; and at 
length carried to fuch a height that it furpaffed the 
bounds of all human patience any longer to endure 
them : That (lie was cut off from all communica- 
tion, not only wich the reft of mankind, but with 
her only fon ; and her maternal fondnefs, which was 
now more enlivened by their unhappy fympathy in 

fituation, 



25a HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, fituation, and was her fole remaining attachment to 
•^^^* this world, deprived even of that melancholy folace 
1583. which letters or melTages could give : That the bit- 
ternefs of her forrows, ftill more than her clofe con- 
finement, had preyed upon her health, and had 
added the infufferable weight of bodily infirmity to 
all thofe other calamities under which ihe laboured : 
That while the daily experience of her maladies 
opened to her the comfortable profpect of an ap- 
proaching deliverance into a repjion where pain and 
forrow are no more, her enemies envied her that 
lall coniolation ; and having fecluded her from every 
joy on earth, had done what in them lay to debar 
her from all hopes in her future and eternal exifl- 
ence : That the exercife of lier reIiQ;ion was refufed 
her ; the ufe of thofe facred rites in which flie had 
been educated ; the commerce with thofe holy mi- 
nifliers whom Heaven had appointed to receive the 
acknowledgment of our tranfgrefiions, and to feal 
our penitence by a folemn re-admiffion into hea- 
venly favour and forgivenefs : That it was in vain 
to complain of the rigours of perfecution exercifed 
in other kingdoms, when a queen and an innocent 
woman Vv'-as excluded from an indulgence which 
never yet, in the moft barbarous countries, had 
been denied to the meaneft and moll obnoxious 
malefactor : That could die ever be induced to 
defcend from that royal dignity in which Providence 
had placed her, or depart from her appeal to Heaven, 
there vvas only one other tribunal to which flie would 
appeal from all her enemies ; to the juftice and hu- 
manity of Elizabeth's own bread, and to that lenity 
which, uninfluenced by mahgnant counfel, fhe 
would naturally be induced to exercife towards her : 
And that Che fmally intreated her to refume her na- 
tural difpofition, and to reflect on the lupport, as 
well as couifo rt, which The might" receive from her 
fen and herfclf, if, joining the obligations of grati- 
tude 



ELIZABETH. 253 

tude to the ties of blood, (lie would deign to raife chap. 
them from their prefeiit melancholy fituation, and ^'^^• 
reinftate them in that liberty and authority to which g 
they were entitled ". 

Elizabeth was engaged to objflrucl Mary's re- 
ftoration, chiefly becaufe fhe forefaw an unhappy 
alternative attending that event. If this princefs 
recovered any conliderable fliare of authority in 
Scotland, her refentment, ambition, zeal, and con- 
nexions both domellic and foreign, might render 
her a dangerous neighbour to England, and enable 
her, after fupprefling the proteRant party among her 
fubjefts, to revive thofe pretenfions which /he had 
formerly advanced to the crown, and which her 
partifans in both kingdoms ftill fupported with 
great induftry and affurance. If fhe were reinflated 
in power with fuch ftricl limitations as could not be 
broken, flie might be difgufted with her fituation ; 
and flying abroad, form more defperate attempts 
than any fovereign who had a crown to hazard ^ 
would willingly undertake. Mary herfelf, fenfible 
of thefe difficulties, and convinced by experience 
that Elizabeth would for ever debar her the throne, 
was now become more humble in her wifhes ; and 
as age and infirmities had reprefled thofe fentiments 
of ambition by which fhe had formerly been fo 
much aduated, fPie was willing to facrifice all her 
hopes of grandeur in order to obtain a little liberty ; 
a bleffing to which flie naturally afpired with the 
fondefl impatience. She propofed therefore, that 
Ihe fhould be allbciated with her fon in the title to 
the crown of Scotland, but that the adminiftration 
Ihould remain folely in him : And ffie was content 
t© live in England in a private ftation, and even 
under a kind of reftraint ; but with fome more 
-liberty, both for exercife and company, than fhe had 
enjoyed fnice the firfl difcovery of her intrigues with. 

" Camden, p. 489. 

the 



154 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CBAP. the duke of Norfolk. But Elizabeth, afraid lefl 
^^^- , fuch a loofe method of guarding her would facilitate 
j^g,^ her efcape into France or Spain, or at lead would 
encourage and encreafe her partifans, and enable her 
to condu<^ thofe intrigues to which ihc had already 
difcovered fo (Irong a propenfity, was fecretly de- 
termined to deny her requefls ; and though fhe 
feigned to aiTent to them, Ihe well knew how to 
difappoint the expectations of the unhappy princefs. 
While Lenox maintained his authority in Scotland, 
Hie never gave any reply to all the applications made 
to her by the Scottiih queen "^ : At prefent, when 
her own creatures had acquired pofleHion of the go-* 
vernment, (lie was refolved to throw the odium of 
refufal upon them ; and pretending that nothing 
farther was required to a perfect accomm.odation 
than the concurrence of the council of fcate in Scot- 
land, fhe ordered her ambaflador, Bowes, to open 
the negotiation for Mary's liberty, and her aflbcia- 
tion with her fon in the title to the crown. Though 
file feemed to make this conceffion to Mary, fhe re- 
fuied her the liberty of fending any ambaffador of 
her ov/n ; and that princefs could eafily conjedure 
from this circumilance what would be the refult of 
the pretended negotiation. Ihe privy council of 
Scotland, inftigated by the clergy, rejected all treaty j 
and James, who was now a captive in their hands, 
affirmed that he had never agreed to an aflbciation 
with his mother, and that the matter had never gone 
farther than fome loofe propofals for that purpofe ". 
The afiairs of Scotland remained not long in the 
prefent fituation. James, impatient of reilraint, 
made his efcape from his keepers ; and, flying to 
St. Andrev/s, fummoned his friends and partifans 
to attend him. The earls of Argyle, Marfhal, 
Montrofe, and Rothes, hastened to pay their duty to 
their fovereign ; and the oppofite party found them- 

w J-V)li, vol. ii. p. 540. ^ MS, in the Advocates'" Library. 

A. J. a8. p. 401. hoiii the Cott, Lib. Calig. c. 9. 

felves 



Elizabeth. 255 

felves unable to refill fo powerful a combination. C ii A P. 
They were offered a pardon upon their fubmiffion, v^^'i^^ 
and an acknowledgment of their fault in felzing the ,jgj. 
king's perfon, and reftraining him from his liberty. 
Some of them accepted of the terms : The greater 
number, particularly Angus, Hamilton, Marre, 
Glamis, left the country, and took ihelter in Ireland 
or England, where they were protedled by Elizabeth. 
The earl of Arran was recalled to court ; and the 
malcontents, who could not brook the authority of 
Lenox, a man of virtue and moderation, found that 
by their refiftance they had thrown all power into 
the hands of a perfon whofe counfels were as violent 
as his manners were profligate ^. 

Elizabeth wrote a letter to James ; In vv^hlch 
(lie quoted a moral fentence from Ifocrates, and in- 
diredly reproached him with inconftancy, and a 
breach of his engagements. James, in his reply, 
juftified his meafures ; and retaliated by turning two 
paflages of Ifocrates againft her'''. She next fent 
Walhngham on an embafly to him ; and her chief 
purpofe in employing that aged minifter In an errand 
where fo httle bufmefs was to be tranfacled, was to 
learn from a man of fo much penetration and ex- 
perience, the real chara«Sler of James. 1 his young 
prince poifelftd good parts, though not accompanied 
with that vigour and indullry which his ftation re- 
quired ; and as he excelled in general difcourfe and 
converfation, Walfnigham entertained a higher idea 
of his talents than he was afterwards found, when 
real bufmefs was tranfa6led, to have fully merited ''. 
The account which he gave his miftrefs induced her 
to treat James thenceforth with fome more regard 
than Ihe had hitherto been inclined to pay him. 



y Spotfwood, p. 325, 516, Zc r.'q. 

* Melvil, p. 140, 14.1. Strype, vol, lii. p. 165. 

» Melvil, p. 148. Jebb, vol. ii, p. 530. 



Th£ 



255 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP. The king of Scots perfevering in his prefent 
^^^* views, fummoned a parliament ; where it was en- 
,,3. afted, that no clergyman fhould prefume in his 
fermons to utter falfe, untrue, or fcandalous fpeeches 
againft the king, the council, or the public n^.oafures, 
or to meddle in an improper manner with the affairs 
of his majefty and the ftates ''. The clergy, finding 
that the pulpit would be no longer a fanOiuary for 
them, were extremely offended : They laid that the 
king was become popifh in his heart ; and they gave 
their adverfaries the epithets of grofs libertines, 
belly gods, and infamous perfons \ The violent 
condud of Arran foon brought over the popularity 
to their fide. The earl of Gowry, though par- 
doned for the late attempt, was committed to priibn, 
was tried on fome new accufations, condemned and 
executed. Many innocent perfons fuffered from 
the tyranny of this favourite ; and the banifhed lords 
being aflilled by Elizabeth, now found the time 
favourable for the recovery of their eftates and au- 
thority. After they had been foiled in one attempt 
upon Stirling, they prevailed in another ; and being 
admitted to the king's prefence, were pardoned and 
reftored to his favour. 

Arran was degraded from authority ; deprived 
of that eftate and title which he had ufurped ; and 
the whole country feemed to be compofed to tran- 
quillity* Elizabeth, after oppofing, during fome 
time, the credit of the favourite, had found it more 
expedient before his fall to compound all differences 
with him by means of Davifon, a miniiler whom 
fhe fent to Scotland : But having more confidence 
in the lords wiiom (he had helped to reftore, Ihe 
y^as pleafed with this alteration of affairs ; and main- 
tained a good correfpondence with the new court 
and miniltry of James. 

*> Spoifwood, p. 333. '^ Ibid. p. 334. 



ELIZABETH. 



257 



These revolutions in Scotland would have been C hap. 
regarded as of fmall importance to the rej fe and ■^^'^• 
fecurity of Elizabeth, had her own fubj fts been ,^g^^ 
entirely united, and had not the zeal of the; ca- Confpira- 
tholics, excited by conftraint more propely than Jp'^^Jg^j 
perfecution, daily threatened her with fome dan- 
gerous infurredlion^ The vigilance of the mini- 
flers, particularly of Burleigh and Walfrngham, was 
raifed in proportion to the adivity of the malcon- 
tents ; and many arts, which had been blameable 
in a more peaceful government, were employed in 
detedling confpiracies, and even difcovering the 
fecret inclinations of men. Counterfeit letters were 
written in the name of the queen of Scots, or of the 
Englifli exiles, and privately conveyed to the honfes 
of the catholics: Spies were hired to obferve the 
actions and difcourfe of fufpefted perfons : Informers 
were countenanced : And though the fagacity of 
thefe two great minifters helped t^iem to diflinguifli 
•the true from the falfe intelligence, many calumnies 
were, no doubt, hearkened to, and all the fubjefts, 
particularly the cathoHcs, kept in the utmoft anxiety 
and inquietude. Henry Piercy earl of Northum- 
berland, brother to the earl beheaded fome years 
before, and Philip Howard earl of Arundel, fon of 
the unfortunate duke of Norfolk, fell under fufpi- 
eion ; and the latter was, by order of council, con- 
fined to his own houfe. Francis Throgmorton, a 
private gentleman, was committed to cuftody, on 
account of a letter which he had written to the 
queen of Scots, and which was intercepted. Lord 
Paget and Charles Arundel, who had been engaged 
with him in treafonable defigns, immediately with- 
drew beyond fea. Throgmorton confefled that a 
plan for an invafion and infurreftion had been laid, 
and though, on his trial, he was defirous of re- 
trading this confeffion, and imputing it to the fear 
of torture, he was found guilty, and executed. 
Mendoza the Spanilh ambaflfador, having promoted 

Vol. V. S this 



«^8 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, this confpiracy, was ordered to depart the kingdom ; 
y^.^^^-, 'iJ'^d Wade was fent into Spain, to excufe his dif» 
: 1384. Kiiflion, and to defire the king to fend another am- 
baifador in his place : But Philip would not fo 
much as admit the Engliih amballador to his pre- 
feiice. Creighton, a Scottifh jefuit, coming over 
on board a veflTel which was ieized, tore fome papers, 
with an mteiition of throwing them into the fea ; 
but the wind blowing them back upon the fhip, they 
were piece;! together, and difcovered fome danger- 
ous fecrets ^ 

Many of thefe confpiracies were, with great ap- 
pearance of reafon, imputed to the intrigues of the 
queen of Scots " ; and as her name was employed 
in all of them, the council thought that they could 
not ufe too many precautions againd the danger of 
her claims, and the refllefs adivity of her temper. 
She was removed from under the care of the earl of 
Shrewfbury, who, though vigilant and faithful in 
that truft, had alfo been indulgent to his prifoner, 
particularly with regard to air and exercife : And 
ihe was committed to the cuftody of fir Amias 
Paulet and fir Drue Djury ; men of honour, but 
inflexible in their care and attention. An afTociation 
was alfo fet on foot by the earl of Leiceiler and other 
courtiers ; and as Elizabeth was beloved by the 
whole nation, except the more zealous catliolics, 
men of all ranks willingly flocked to the lubfcrip- 
tion of it. The purport of this alTociation was to 
defend the queen, to revenge her death or any in- 
jury committed agaiiift her, and to exclude from 
the thrond all claimants, what title foever they 
might poffefs, by whofe fuggeflion or for whofe 
behoof any violence fliould be olFered to her ma- 
jefl:y \ The queen of Scots was fenfible that this 
affociation was levelled againfl her ; and to remove 



^ Camden, y. 499. « Strype, vol. iii. p. 246. 

* Stale Tiials, vol. i. p. iza, 123. 



i^ll 



E L I Z A 15 E T H. 259 

all fufpicion from herfelf, flie alfo defired leave to C H a p. 
lubfcribe it. vj^t^ 

Elizabeth, that flie might the more difcourage i-s^., 
malcontents, by fliewing them the concurrence of ^3^1 ^'^'ov. 
the nation in her favour, fummoned a new parlia- j^J^^[ '*' 
ment; and fhe met with that dutiful attachment 
which file expeftcd. The aflbciation was confirmed 
by parliament ; and a claufe was added, by which 
the queen was empowered to name commiffioners 
for the trial of any pretender to the crown who 
fhould attempt or imagine any invafion, inlurrec- 
tion, or alfairmation againfl her : Upon condenina- 
tion, pronounced by thefe commifTioners, the guilty 
perfon was excluded from all claim to the fuccef- 
fion, and was farther puniihable as her majefty 
fhould dired:. And for greater fecurity, a council 
oi: regency, in cafe of the queen's violent death, 
was appointed to govern the kingdom, to fettle the 
fucceifion, and to take vengeance for that ad; of 
treafon ^. 

A SKVERE law was alfo enaded againft jefuits and 
popifh pried; s : It was ordained that they fhould 
depart the kingdom within forty days ; that thofe 
who fliould remain beyond that time, or fliould 
afterv/ards return, fhould be guilty of treafon ; that 
thofe who harboured or relieved them fliould be 
guilty of felony ; that thofe who were educated in 
feminaries, if they returned not in fix months after 
notice given, and fubmitted not themfelves to the 
queen, before a bifhop or two juftices, fliould be 
guilty of treafon ; aud that if any, fo fubmitting 
themfelves, fhould within ten years approach the 
court, or come within ten miles of it, their fubmif- 
fion fhould be void ^. By this law the exercife of the 
cathoHc religion, which had formerly been prohibited 
under lighter penalties, and which was in many in- 
flances connived at, was totally fuppreffed. In the 

e 27 Eliz. cap. I. ^ Ibid. cap. a, 

S 2 fubfe- 



■t6o HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, fubfequent part of the queen's reign, the law was 
^^~^_^ fometimes executed by the capital punifhment of 
j^g^.. priefts ; and though the partiians of that princefs 
afferted that they were puniflied for their treafon, 
not their reHgion, the apology muft only be under- 
ftpod in this fenfe, that the law was enafted on ac- 
count of the treafonable views and attempts of the 
feft, not that every individual who fuffered the pe- 
nalty of the law was convided of treafon '. The 
catholics, therefore, might now with juftice com^ 
plain of a violent perfecution ; which we may fafely 
affirm, in fpite of the rigid and bigoted maxims of 
that age, not to be the bed method of converting 
them, or of reconciling them to the eilabliflied go- 
vernment and religion. 

The parliament, befides arming the queen with 
thefe powers, granted her a fupply of one fubfidy 
and two fifteenths. The only circumftance in which 
their proceedings were difagreeable to her, was an 
application made by the commons for a farther re- 
formation in ecclefiailical matters. Yet even in this 
attempt, which affecled her as well as them in a 
delicate point, they difcovered how much they were 
overawed by her authority. The majority of the 
houfe were puritans, or inclined to that fedl "" ; but 
the fevere reprimands which they had already in 
former feffions met with from the throne, deterred 
them from introducing any bill concerning religion ; 
a proceeding which would have been interpreted as 
an encroachment on the prerogative : They were 

^ Some even of thofe who defend the queen's nieafures allow, that 
in ten yeais fifty priefts were executed, and fifty-five banilhed, 
Camden, p. 649. 

^ Befides the petition after mentioned, another proof of the preva- 
lency of the puritans among the commons w.is their paffing a bill for 
the reverent obferv.ince of Sunday, which thty tenr'ed ihe Sabbath, and 
the depriving the people of thofe amufements. which they were ;:ccuf- 
tomed 10 take on that day. D'Ewes, p. 335. It was a ftrong fymp- 
tom of a contraiy f()irit in the upper houfe, tliat they propoled to add| 
Wednefday to the faft days, and to prohibit entirely the eating of 
ifle/h on that day. D'Ewes, p. 3730 "* 

content 



E L I Z A B IL T H. 261 

content to proceed by way of humble petition, and chap. 
that not addrefl'ed to her majefty, which would have ^J^Ml* 
given offence, but to the houfe of lords, or rather ,^3^, 
the bifhops, who h^d a feat in that houfe, and from 
whom alone they were willing to receive all ad- 
vances towards reformation ' : A ftrange departure 
from what we now apprehend to be the dignity of 
the commons ! 

The commons defired, in their humble petition, 
that no bifliop fhould exercife his funftion of ordina- 
tion but with the confent and concurrence of fix 
prefbyters : But this demand, as it really introduced 
a change of ecclefiaftical government, was firmly re- 
jected by the prelateSf They defired that no clergy- 
man lliould be inftituted into any benefice, without 
previous notice being given to the parifh, that they 
might examine whether there lay any objeftion to 
his life or doftrine : An attempt towards a popular 
model, which naturally met with the fame fate. In. 
another article of the petition, they prayed that the 
bilhops (liould not infiH upon every ceremony, or 
deprive incumbents for omitting parr of the fervice : 
As if uniformity in public worfliip had not been 
eftablifhed by law ; or as if the prelates had been 
endowed with a difpenfmg power. They com- 
plained of abufes which prevailed in pronouncing 
the fentence of excommunication, and they entreated 
the reverend fathers to think of fome law for the 
remedy of thefe abufes : Implying, that thofe mat- 
ters were too high for the commons of themfelves to 
attempt. 

But the moil material article which the com- 
mons touched upon in their petition, was the court 
of ecclefiaftical commifTion, and the oath ex officio, 
as it was called, exaCled by that court. This 
is a fubjed of fuch importance as to merit fome 
explanation. 

1 D'Ewes, p. 357, 

S 3 The 



court. 



262 HISTORY OF ENGLAND, 

CHAP. The firft primate after the queen's acceffion was 
^^f^^ Parker ; a man rigid in exacting conformity to the 
1584. eftablifhed worihip, and in punifliing, by fine or 
The eccle- deprivation, all the puritanical clergymen who at- 
fiathcai tempted to innovate any thing in the habits, cere- 
monies, or liturgy of the church. He died in 1575 ; 
and was fucceeded by Grindal, who, as he himfelf 
was inclined to the new feci, was v/ith great difficulty 
brought to execute the laws againlt them, or to pu~ 
nilh the nonconforming clergy. He declined 
obeying the queen's orders for the fuppreffion ot 
pi-ophefyings, or the ailemblies of the zealots in 
private houfes, which flie apprehended had become 
fo many academies of fanaticifm; and for this offence 
fhe had, by an order of the Star Chamber, fequef- 
tered him from his archiepifcopal fundion, and con- 
fined him to his own houfe. Upon his death, 
which happened in 1583, fhe determined not to fall 
into the lame error in her next choice ; an4 fhe 
named Whitgift, a zealous churchman, who had al- 
ready fignalized his pen in controverfy, and who, 
having in vain attempted to convince the puritans 
by argument, was now refolved to' open their eyes 
by power, and by the execution of penal flatutes. 
He informed the queen that all the fpiritual au- 
thority lodged in the prelates was infignificant with- 
out the fanclion of the crown ; and as there was no 
ecclefiafhical commiffion at that time in force, he 
engaged her to iifue a new one ; more arbitrary 
than any of the former, and conveying more unli- 
mited authority "\ She appointed forty-four com- 
miffioncrs, twelve of whom were ecclefiaitics ; three 
commiffioners made a quorum ; the jurifdI6lion of 
the court extended over the whole kingdom, and 
over all orders of men ; and every circumftance of 
its authority, and all its methods of proceeding, 
were contrary to the cleareft principles of law and 
natural equity. The commifTioners were empowered 

«" Neal's Hiftory of the Puritans, vol. i. p. 4.10, 

to 



ELIZABETH. 263 

to vifit and reform all errors, herefies, fchifms, In CHAP, 
a word, to regulate all opinions-, as well as to pu- ^^^[^1* 
nifh all breach of uniformity in the exercife of public 1^84., ' 
worfliip. They were directed to make enquiry, not 
■only by the legal methods of juries and witnelfes, 
but by all other means and ways which they could 
"devife ; that is, by the rack, by torture, by inqui- 
fition, by impiifonment. Where they found rea- 
fon to fufpedl any perfon, they mjght adminifler to 
him an oath, called ex qfjicio, by which he was 
bound to anfwer all queftions, and might thereby 
be obliged to accufe himfelf or his mod intimate 
friend. The fines which they levied were difcre- 
tionary, and often occafioned the total ruin of the 
offender, contrary to the eftabliflied laws of the 
kingdom. The impiifonment to which they con- 
demned any delinquent was limited by no rule but 
their own pleafure. They afTumed a power of im- 
pofing on the clergy what new articles of fubfcrip- 
tion, and confequently of faith, they thought pro- 
per. Though all other fpiritual courts were fubjetSl, 
iince the reformation, to inhibitions from the fu- 
preme courts of law, the ecclefiaflical commiiirioners 
were exem^pted from that legal jurifdiclion, and w^ere 
liable to no control. And the more to enlarge 
their authority, they were empowered to punifh all 
incelts, adulteries, fornications ; ail outrages, mif- 
behaviours, and diforders in marriage : And the 
puniiliments which they might inflift, w^ere ac- 
cording to their wifdom, confcience, and difcretion. 
In a word, this court was a real Inquifition ; at- 
tended with all the iniquities, as well as cruelties, 
infeparable from that tribunal. And as the jurif- 
diftion of the ecclefiaftical court was deflruftive of 
all law, fo its erection was deemed by many a mere 
ufurpation of this imperious princefs ; and had no 
other foundation than a claufe of a itatute, refloring 
the fupremacy to the crown, and empowering the 
S 4 fovereign 



2(54^ HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, fovereign to appoint commiflioners for exercifmg: 
,^J j}^' /, that prerogative. But prerogative in general, efpe- 
I J 84. cially the fupremacy, was fuppofed in that age to in- 
volve powers which no law, precedent, or reafon 
could limit and determine. 

But though the commons, in their humble pe- 
tition to the prelates, had touched fo gently and fub- 
miflively on the ecclefiaftical grievances, the queen, 
in a fpeech from the throne at the end of the feffion, 
could not forbear taking notice of their prefumption, 
and reproving them for thofe murmurs which, for 
fear of offending her, they had pronounced fo low 
as not dire^Iy to reach her royal ears. After giving 
them fome general thanks for their attachment to 
her, and making profeffions of affeftion to her fub- 
je6ts, fhe told them, that whoever found fault with 
the church threw a llander upon her, fmce fhe was 
* appointed by God fupreme ruler over it, and no 
herefies or fchifms could prevail in the kingdom but 
by her permifTion and negligence : That fome abufes 
niufl neceflarily have place in every thing ; but fhe 
warned the prelates to be watchful ; for if fhe found 
them carelefs of their charge, flie was fully deter- 
mined to depofe them : That flie was commonly 
fuppofed to have employed herfelf in many fludies, 
particularly philofophical (by which I fuppofe fhe 
meant theological), and flie would confefs that few, 
whofe leifure had not allowed them to make pro- 
feflion of fcience, bad read or reflected more : That 
as fhe could difcern the prefumption of many, in 
curioufly canvalling the fcriptures, and flarting in- 
novations, fhe would no longer endure this licen- 
tioufnefs ; but meant to guide her people, by God*s 
rule, in the juft mean between the corruptions of 
Rome and the errors of modern feclaries : And that 
as the Romanifts were the inveterate enemies of her 
perfon, fo the other innovators were dangerous to 
all kingly government j and, under colour of 

preaching 



ELIZABETH. 26s 

preaching the word of God, prefumed to exerclfe chap. 
their private judgment, and to cenfure the actions of ,^1J^L* 
the prince". ^ 138^. 

From the whole of this tranfa<5lion we may ob- 
ferve, that the commons, in making their general 
application to the prelates, as well as in fome par- 
ticular articles of their petition, fhewed themfelves 
wholly ignorant, no lefs than the queen, of the prin- 
ciples of liberty, and a legal conftitution. And it 
may not be unworthy of remark, that Elizabeth, fo 
far from yielding to the difpleafure of the parlia- 
ment againft the ecclefiaftical commiffion, granted, 
before the end qf her reign, a new commiilion ; in 
which fhe enlarged, rather than reftrained, the 
powers of the commiflioners ^'. 

During this fefiion of parliament there was dif- 
covered a confpiracy, which much increafed the 
general animofity againfl the catholics, and (till far- 
ther widened the breach between the religious par- 
ties. William Parry, a catholic gentleman, had 
received the queen's pardon for a crime, by which 
he v^'as expofed to capital punifhment ; and, having 
obtained permiiTion to travel, he retired to Milan, 
and made open profellion of his religion, which he 
had concealed while he remained in England. He 
was here perfuaded by Palmio, a Jefuit, that he could 
not perform a more meritorious action than to take 
away the life of his fovereign and his benefa(5lrefs ; 
the nuncio Campeggio, when confulted, approved 
extremely of this pious undertaking ; and Parry, 
though ilill agitated with doubts, came to Paris, 
with an intention of palling over to England, and 
executing his bloody purpofe. He was here en- 
couraged in the defign by Thomas Morgan, a gen- 
tleman of great credit in the party ; and though 
Watts and fome other catholic priefts told him that 

n See note [R] at the end of the \'olume, 
" Ryiiier, vol, xvi. p. 292, 386, 4.00, 

ths 



t66 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, the enterprife was criminal and impious, he preferred 
■^^^- the authority of Raggazzoni, the nuncio at Paris, 
j^ and determined to perfill in his refolution. He 
here wrote a letter to the pope, which was, conveyed 
to cardinal Como ; he communicated his intention 
to the holy father ; and craved his abfolution and 
' paternal benediclion. He received an anfwer from 
the cardinal, by which he found that his purpofe 
was extrcmsly applauded ; aiid he came over to 
England with a full defign of carrying it into exe- 
cution. So deeply are the fentiments of morahty 
engraved in the human breail, that it is difficult 
even for the prejudices of falfe religion totally to 
efface them ; and this bigoted affallin refolved, be- 
lore he came to extremities, to try every other ex- 
pedient for alleviating the perfecutions under which 
the catholics at that time laboured. He found 
jneans of being introduced to the queen ; affured 
her that many confpiracies were formed againft her ; 
and exhorted her, as fhe tendered her life, to give 
the Romaniils fome more indulgence in the exer- 
cife of their religion : But, left he fhould be tempted 
by the opportunity to affailinate her, he always can^e 
to court unprovided with every offenfive weapon. 
He even found means to be elected member of 
parliament ; and having made a vehement harangue 
againft the fevere laws enafted this laft feflion, Vv^as 
committed to cuftody for his freedom, and fequef- 
tered from the houfe. His failure in thefe attempts 
confirmed him the more in his former refolution ; 
and he communicated his intentions to Nevil, who 
entered zealoully into the defign, and was deter-- 
mined to have a lliare in the merits of its execution. 
A book, newly publilhed by Dr. Allen, afterwards 
created a cnidinal, ferved farther to efface all their 
fcruples v\dth regard to the murder of an heretical 
prince ; and. having agreed to flioot the queen while 
llie fhould be taking the air on horfeback, they re- 
folved. 



ELIZABETH. 267 

folved, if they could not make their efcape, to facri- chap. 
lice their lives, in fulfilling a duty fo agreeable, as ^^^* 
they imagined, to the will of God and to true reli- j g^^ 
gion. But while they were watching an opportunity 
for the execution of their purpofe, the earl of Weft- 
moreland happened to die in exile ; and as Nevil 
was next heir to that family, he began to entertain 
hopes, that by doing fome acceptable fervice to the 
queen, he might recover the cltate and honours 
which had been forfeited by the rebellion of the laft 
earl. He betrayed the whole confpiracy to the 
miniflers ; and Parry, being thrown into prifon, 
confefled the guilt, both to them and to the jury 
who tried him. The letter from cardinal Co mo, 
being produced in court, put Parry's narrative be- 
yond all quedion ; and that criminal, having received 
lentence of death '', fuffered the punifliment which 
the law appointed lor his treafonable confpiracy \ 

These bloody defigns now appeared every where 
as the refult of that bigoted fpirit by v/hich the two 
religions, efpecially the catholic, v;ere at this time 
actuated. Sf>merville, a gentleman of the county 
of Warwic, fomewhat difordered in his underHand- 
ing, had heard fo much of the merit attending the 
aflaffination of heretics and perfeciitors, that he came 
to London with a view of murdering the queen ; 
but having betrayed his defign by fome extravagances, 
he vv'as throv^m into prifon, and there perifhed by a 
voluntary death'. About the fame time Baltazar T'ne affairs 
Gerard, a Burgundian, undertook and executed ^^/'''^^.^"^ 
the fame defign againfl the prince of Orange ; and """^"^^* 
that great man perifhed at Delft, by the hands of a 
defperate aflalfm, vWio, with a refoiution worthy of 
a better caufe, facrificed his own life, in order to de- 
ftroy the fam.oiis reilorer and proteclor of relio;ious 
liberty. The Flemings, who regarded that prince 

' P State Trials, vol. i. p. 105, & feq. Stiype, vol. iii. p. 255, & feq. 

1 See note [S] at tlit end of the vo.uine. ' 

' Camden, p. 495. 

^3 as 



268 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

e H A p. as their father, were filled with great forrow, as well 
XLI. when they confidered the miferable end of fo brave 
,2 a patriot, as their own forlorn condition from the lofs 
of fo powerful and prudent a leader, and from the 
rapid progrefs of the Spaniih arms. The prince of 
Parma had made every year great advances upon 
them, had reduced feveral of the provinces to obe- 
' dience, and had laid clofe fiege to Antwerp, the 

richeft and moft populous city of the Netherlands, 
whofe fubjeclion, it was forefeen, would give a mor- 
tal blow to the already declining affairs of the re- 
volted provinces. The only hopes which remained 
to them arofe from the profpect of foreign fuccour. 
Being well acquainted with the cautious and frugal 
maxims of Ehzabcth, they expected better fuccefs 
in France ', and, in the view of engaging Henry to 
embrace their defence, they tendered him the fo- 
J585. vereignty of their provinces. But the prefent con- 
dition of that monarchy obliged the king to rejedl fo 
advantageous an olfer. The duke of Anjou's death, 
which he thought would have tended to reflore pub- 
lic tranquillity, by delivering him from the intrigues 
of that prince, plunged him into the deeped dif- 
trefs ; and the king of Navarre, a profeiled hugo- 
not, being^next heir to the crown, the duke of 
Guife took thence occafion to revive the catholic 
league, and to urge Henry, by the moft violent ex- 
pedients, to feek the exclufion of that brave and 
virtuous prince. Henry himfelf, though a zealous 
catholic, yet, becaufe he declined complying with 
their precipitate meafures, became an object of aver- 
fion to the league ; and as his zeal, in pjactifmg all 
the fuperftitious obfervances of the Romifli church, 
was accon^ipanied with a very hcentious condud in 
private life ; the cathoHc fadion, in contradidion to 
univerfal experience, embraced thence the pretext 
of reprefenting his devotion as mere deceit and hy- 
pocrifv. Finding his authority to decline, he was 
obliged to declare war againft the hugonots, and to 

put 



. ELIZABETH. 269 

put arms Into the hands of the league, whom, botli CHAP, 
on account of their dangerous pretenfions at home, ,^^^„-^ 
and their clofe alliance with Philip, he fecretly re- i^jjs. 
garded as his more dangerous enemies. Conftrained 
by the fame policy, he dreaded the danger of aflbci- 
ating himfelf with the revolted proteftants in the Low 
Countries, and was obliged to renounce that inviting 
opportunity ot revenging himfelf for all the hoflile 
intrigues and enterprifes of Philip. 

The States, reduced to this extremity, fent over 
a folemn embaify to London, and made anew an 
offer to the queen, of acknowledging her for their 
fovereign, on condition of obtaining her proteftion 
and alliftance. Elizabeth's wifeft counfellors were 
divided in ophilon with regard to the conduct which 
fhe iliould hold in this critical and important 
emergence. Some advifed her to rejed: the offer 
of the States, and reprefented the immineit dan- 
gers, as well as injulHce, attending the acceptance 
of it. They faid, that the fupprellion of rebellious 
fubjefts was the common caufe of all fovereipns, and 
any encouragement given to the revolt of the Fle- 
mings, might prove the example of a like pernicious 
licence to the Engiifh : That though princes were 
bound by the laws of the Supreme Being not to 
opprefs their fubjefts, the people never were entitled 
to forget all duty to their fovereign, or transfer, from 
every fancy or difguft, or even from the jufled 
ground of complaint, their obedience to any other 
mailer : That the queen, in the fuccours hitherto 
afforded the Flemings, had confidered them as la- 
bouring under oppreliion, not as entitled to freedom ; 
and had intended only to admoniih Philip not to per- 
fevere in his tyranny, without any view of ravilhin<T 
from him thefe provinces which he enjoyed by here- 
ditary right from his anceflors : That her fituation 
in L-eland, and ev.n in England, would afford that 
powerful monarch fufficient opportunity of retaliat- 
ing 



270 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP. Ing upon her ; and fhe muil thenceforth expecfc 
^^^^^^ that, inftead of fecretly fomenting facl:ion, he would 
1585. openly employ his whole force in the protection and 
defence of the catholics : That the pope would un- 
doubtedly unite his fpiritual arms to the temporal 
ones of Spain : And that the queen v/ould foon re- 
pent her making fo precarious an acquifition in fo- 
reign countries, by expofing her own dominions to 
the moft imminent danger '. 

Other counfellors of Elizabeth maintained a con- 
trary opinion. They aiferted, that the queen had 
not, even irom the besinninir of her reio^n, but cer- 
tainly had hot at prefent, the choice whether ilie 
would embrace friendfliip or hoftility with Philip : 
That by the whole tenor of that prince's conduct it 
appeared, that his fole aims were, the extending of 
his empire, and the entire fubje£lion of the pro- 
teflants, under th^ fpecious pretence of maintaining 
the catholic faith: That the provocations which I'he 
had already given him, joined to his general fcheme 
of policy, v/ould for ever render him her implaca- 
ble enemy ; and as foon as he had lubdued his re- 
volted fubjefts, he would undoubtedly fall, with the 
whole force of his united empire, on her defencelefs 
ftate : That the only quelHon was, whether Hie would 
maintain a war "abroad, and fupported by allies, or 
- wait till the fubjeclion of all the confederates of 
England fhould give her enemies leifure to begin 
their hoftilities in the bov/els of the kingdom : That 
the revolted provinces, though in a declining con- 
dition, poircfied liill confiderable force ; and by the 
aiTiftance of England, by the advantages of their 
fituation, and by their inveterate antipathy to Philip, 
might fol} be enabled to maintain the contefl: againfl 
the Spanifh monarchy : That their maritime power, 
united to the queen's, would give her entire fecurity 

5 Camden, p. 507. Bentivoglio, part 2. lib, iv. 

on 



ELIZABETH. 271 

on the fide from which alone flie could be affaulted, chap. 
and would even enable her to make inroads on ^^'ILj 
Philip's dominions, both in Europe and the Indies: 138^. 
That a war which was necefl'ary could never be un^ 
jufl ; and felf-defence was concerned, as well in pre- 
venting certain dangers at a diftance, as in repelling 
any immediate invafion : And that, fmce hoilility 
with Spain was the unavoidable confequence of the 
prefent intereds and fituations of the two monarchies, 
it were better to compeni'ate that danger and lofs by 
the acquifition of fuch important provinces to the 
Engiilh empire \ 

Amidst thefe oppofite counfels the queen, ap- 
prehenhve ot the confequences attending each ex- 
treme, was inclined co fteer a middle courfe ; and 
though fuch conduft is feldom prudent, flie was 
not, in this refolution, guided by any prejudice or 
miftaken ai^'eclion. She was determined not to 
permit, without oppofition, the total fubjetlion of 
the revolted provinces, whofe interefls flie deemed 
fo clofely connefted with her own : But forefeeing 
that the acceptance of their iovereignty would oblige 
her to employ her whole force in their defence, would 
give umbrage to her neighbours, and would expofe 
her to the reproach of ambition and ufurpation, im- 
putations which hitherto fhe had carefully avoided, 
flie immediately rejected this offer. She concluded 
a league v/ith the States on the following conditions : 
That fhe fliould fend over an army to their affifl- 
ance, of live thoufand foot and a thoufand horfe, 
and pay them during the war ; that the general, and 
tv/o others whom flie fhould appoint, fhould be ad- 
mitted into the council of the States ; that neither 
party fliould make peace without the confent of the 
other ; that her expences fhould be refunded after 
the conclufion of the war ; and that the tov/ns of 
Flufliing and the Brille, with the caflle of Ramme- 

* Camden, p, 507, Bentivoglio, part 2. lib. iv. 

kins^ 



272 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, kins, jfhould, in the mean time, be configned into 

^^Jj[* her hands by way of fecurity. 
,^8^. The queen knew that this meafure would imme- 

diately engage her in open holtilities with Philip ; 
yet was not flie terrified with the view of the pre- 
fent greatnefs of that monarch. The continent of 
Spain was at that time rich and populous ; and the 
late addition of Portugal, befides fecuring internal 
tranquillity, had annexed an opulent kingdom to 
Philip's dominions, had made him rrafler of many 
fettlements in the Eaft; Indies, and of the whole 
commerce of thole regions, and had much increafed 
his naval power, in which he was before chiefly de- 
ficient. All the princes of Italy, even the pope and 
the court of Rome, were reduced to a kind of fub- 
jeftion under him, and feemed to pofTefs their fove- 
reignty on terms fomewhat precarious. The Auftrian 
branch in Germany, with their dependent prhicj- 
palities, was clofely connected with him, and was 
ready to fupply him with troops for every enterprife. 
All the treafures of the Weft-Indies were in his 
pofTeilion ; and the prefent fcarcity of the precious 
metals in every country of Europe, rendered the 
influence of his riches the more forcible and exten- 
Hve. The Netherlands feemed on the point of re- 
lapfing into fervitude ; and fmall hopes were enter- 
tained of their withflanding thofe numerous and 
veteran armies which, under the command of the 
mofl experienced generals, he employed againfh 
them. Even France, which was wont to counter- 
balance the Auftrian greatnefs, had loft all her force 
from inteftine commotions ; and as the catholics, 
the ruling party, were clofely connected with him, 
he rather expected thence an augmentation than 
a diminution of his power. Upon the whole, fuch 
prcpofTefFions were every where entertained con- 
cerning the force of the Spanifh monarchy, that the 
king of Sweden, when he heard that Elizabeth had 

openly 



ELIZABETH. 273 

Openly embraced the defence of the revolted Fie- chap. 
mings, fcrupled not to fay, that Ihe had now taken "^^ll. 
the diadem from her head, and had adventured it ,^3,, ' 
upon the doubtful chance of war". Yet was this 
princefs rather cautious than enterprifmg in her 
natural temper : She never needed more to be 
impelled by the vigour, than reilrained by the 
prudence, of her minifters : But when ihe faw an 
evident necefTity, fhe braved danger with mag- 
nanimous courage ; and trufling to her own con- 
fummate wifdom, and to the affections, however 
divided, of her people, (he prepared herfelf to refift 
and even to aflault the whole force of the catholic 
monarch. 

The earl of Leicefter was fent over to Holland, 
at the head of the Englifh auxiliary forces. He car- 
ried with him a fplendid retinue ; being accompa- 
nied by the young earl of Effex, his fon-in-law, 
the lords Audley and North, fir William Rulfel, 
fir Thomas Shirley, fir Arthur Baflet, ^ir Walter 
Waller, fir Gervafe Clifton, and a felect troop of 
five hundred gentlemen. He was received on his 
arrival at Flufhing by his nephew fir Philip Sidney, 
the governor ; and every town through which he 
paifed expreifed their joy by acclamations and tri- 
umphal arches, as if his prefence and the queen's 
protection had brought them the mod certain de- 
liverance. The States, defirous of engaging Eli- 
zabeth fllll farther in their defence, and knowing 
the interefl which Leicefter poifeffed with her, con- 
ferred on him the title of governor and captain- 
general of the United Provinces, appointed a guard 
to attend him, and treated him in fome refptds as 
their fovereign. But this ftep had a contrary etfsft 
to what they expected. The queen was difpJeafed 
with the artifice of the States, and the ambition of 

>» Camden, p. ^o3. 

Vol. v. T Leicefter. 



274 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP. I.eicefl-er. She feverely reprimanded both ; and it 
^^^T^lj was with Ibme difficulty, that after many humbk: 

,585. fubmilfions they were able to appeaie her. 
Hoftihties AMERICA w"as regarded as the chief fource of 
wit pain. p|^j}jp»g power, as well as the moft defencelefs part 
of his dominions ; and Elizabeth, finding that an 
open breach with that monarch was unavoidable, 
. refolved not to leave him unmolefted in that quarter. 
The great fuccefs of the Spaniards and Portuguefe 
■ in both Indies had excited a fpirit of emulation in 
England ; and as the progrefs of commerce, ftill 
more that of colonies, is flow and gradual, it was 
happy that a war in this critical period had opened 
a more flattering profpect to the avarice and ambi- 
tion of the Englifh, and had tempted them, by the 
view of fudden and exorbitant profit, to engage in 
naval enterprifes. A fleet of twenty fail was equip- 
ped to attack the Spaniards in the Wefl: Indies : Two 
thoufand three hundred volunteers, befides feamen, 
engaged rn board it ; fir Francis Drake was ap- 
pointed admiral ; Chriftopher Carlifle commander 
15 86. of the land forces. They took St. Jago, near Cape 
January. Verde, by furprife ; and found in it plenty of pro- 
vifions, but no riches. They failed to Hifpaniola ; 
and eafily making them.felves mafl:ers of St.NDomingo 
by aflliult, obhged the inhabitants to ranfom their 
houfes by a fum of money. Carthagena fell next 
into their hands after fome more refiftance, and was 
treateti in the fame manner. They burned St. An- 
".thony and St. Helens, two towns on the coafl: of 
Florida. Sailing along the coafl of Virginia, they 
found the fmall remains of a colony which had been 
X planted there by fir Walter Raleigh, and which had 
gone extremely to decay. This was the firfl: attempt 
of the Engliih to form fuch fettlements ; and though 
- they have fmce furpaflTed all European nations, both 
in the fituation of their colonies and in the noble 
principles of liberty and induftry, on which they 
^■v»^■-ilr' are 



E L I Z A B E T H. 275 

are founded ; they had here been (o unfuccefsful, c hap. 
that the milerable planters abandoned their fettle- ,^^"^1;^ 
ments, and prevailed on Drake to carry them with ,^g6. 
him to England. He returned with fo much riches 
as. encouraged the volunteers, and with fuch ac- 
counts of the Spanifh weaknefs in thofe countries, 
as ferved extremely to inflame the fpirits of the na- 
tion to future enterprifes. The great mortality 
which the climate had produced in his fleet was, as 
is ufual, but a feeble reftraint on the avidity and fan- 
guine hopes of young adventurers ". It is thought 
that Drake's fleet firii: introduced the ufe of tobacco 
into England. 

The enterprifes of Leicefler were much lefs fuc* 
cefsful than thofe of Drake. This man poffeiTed 
neither courage nor capacity equal to the trufl: re- 
pofed in him by the queen ; and as he was the only 
bad choice fhe made for any confiderable employ- 
ment, men naturally believed that flie had here, been 
influenced by an affection ftill more partial than 
that of friendfliip. tie gained at firil fome advan- 
tage in an action againft the Spaniards ; and threw 
fuccours into Grave, by which that place was en- 
abled to make a vigorous defence : But the cow- 
ardice of the governor, Van Hemert, rendered all 
thefe efforts ufelefs. tie capitulated after a feeble 
refifl:ance ; and being tried for his conduft, fuffered 
a capital puniftiment from the fentence of a court- 
xnartial. The prince of Parma next undertook the 
{\ege of Venlo, which was furrendered to him after 
fome refiftance. The fate of Nuys was more dif- 
mal ; being taken by aflTault while the garrifon was 
treating of a capitulation. Rhimberg, which was 
garrifoned by twelve hundred Englifli, under the 
command of colonel Morgan, was afterwards be- 
fieged by the Spaniards j and Leicefter, thinking 

■«' Camden, p, 509. 

T 2 himfelf 



27^5 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, himfelf too weak to attempt raifiiig the fiege, endea^ 
f^^..^^,.^ voured to draw oft'" the prince of Parma by forming 
J3g(j. another enterprife. He firil attacked Doefburg^ 
and fuccecded : He then fat down before Zutphen^ 
which the Spanilh general thought fo important a 
fortrefs that he hallcned to its relief. He made the 
marquis of Guefto advance with a convoy, which 
he intended tojthrow into the place. They were fa- 
voured by a fog ; but falling by accident on a body 
of Engliih cavalry, a furious aclion enfiied, in which 
the Spaniards were worded, and the matquis of 
Gonzaga, an Italian nobleman of great reputation 
and family, was llain. The purfuit was (topped by th'p 
advance of the prince of Parma with the main body 
of the Spanifli army ; and the Englifii cavalry, oti 
their return from the field, found their advantage 
more than compenfated by the lofs of fir Philip 
Sidney, who, being mortally wounded in the atlion^ 
was' carried off by the foldiers, and foon after died. 
•This perfoh is defcribed by the writers of that age 
as the niofl perfect model of an accompliflied gen- 
tleman that could be formed even by the wanton 
imagination of poetry or ficlicni Virtuous conduft, 
polite converfation, heroic valour, and elegant 
erudition, all concurred to render him the orna- 
ment and delight of tlie Englifli court ; and as the 
credit which he poiTclTed with the queen and the 
earl of Leiceiter was wholly employed in the en- 
couragement of genius and literature^ his praife? 
have been tranfmitted with advantage to pofterity. 
No perfon was fo low as not to become an object 
of his humanity. After this lafl adion, while he 
was lying on the field mangled with wounds, a bot- 
tle of water was brought him to relieve his thirfl ; 
but obferving a foldier near him in a like miferable 
condition, he faid, T/jIs ?}m?i's nccejhy is Jiill 
greater ihdn mine : And refigned to him the bottle 
of water. The \^Vi'^ of Scots, itruck with admira- 

- - tion 



ELIZABETH. 



2-77 



tion of Sidney's virtue, celebrated his memory in c ii a p. 
^ copy of Latin verfes, which he compofed on the ■^^^• 
death of that young hero. ,^2^/ 

The Englifh, though a long peace had deprived 
them of all experience, were (Irongly poifefled of 
military genius ; and the advantages gained by the 
prince of Parma were not attributed to the fuperior 
bravery and difcipline of the Spaniards, but folely 
to the want of military abilities in Leicefter. The 
States were much difcontented with his manage- 
ment of the war ; flill more v/ith his arbitrary and 
imperious conduct, and at the end of the cam- 
paign they applied to him for a redrefs of all their 
grievances. But Leicefter, without giving them any 
latisfaction, departed foon after for England ". 

The queen, while fhe provoked fo powerful an 
^nemy as the king of Spain, was not forgetful to 
fccure herfelf on the fide of Scotland ; and flie en- 
deavoured both to cultivate the friendihip and alli- 
ance of her kinfman, James, and to remove all 
grounds of quarrel between them. An attempt 
which fhe had made fqme time before was not well 
calculated to gain the confidence of that prince. 
She had difpatched '\Yotton as her ambaffador to 
Scotland; but though {\i9 gave him private in- 
ftruclions with regard to her affairs, fhe informed 
James that when Ihe had any political bufmefs to 
difcufs with him, flie would employ another mini- 
fler ; that this man was not fitted for ferious nego- 
tiations ; and that her chief purpofe in fending him 
was to entertain the- king with wicty and facetious 
converfation. and to partake without refeive of his 
pleafures and amufements. Wotton was mailer of 
profound diirimulation, and knew how to cover, 
imder the appearance of a carelefs gaiety, the deeped 
^efigns and molt dangerous artifices. When but a 

* Camden, p. 512. Rcntivoglioj part ii. li'o, 4, 

T 3 yoiul; 



278 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, youth of twenty, he h.id been employed by his 
xLl. uncle, Dr. Wotton, -dmbafTador in France during 
gg^ the reign of Mary, to enfn'are the conftable, Mont- 
morency ; and had not his purpole been fruftrated 
by pure accident, his cunning had prevailed over 
all the caution and experience of that aged minifter. 
It is no wonder that, after years had improved him 
in all the arts of deceit, he fhould gain an afcendant 
over a young prince of fo open and unguarded a 
temper as James ; efpecially when the queen's re- 
commendation prepared the way for his reception. 
He was admitted into all the pleafures of the king ; 
made himfelf mailer of his fecrets ; and had lb 
much the more authority with him in political tranf- 
aftions, as he did not fecm to pay the lead atten- 
tion to thefe matters. The Scottilh miniilers, who 
obferved the growing interell of this man, endea- 
voured to acquire his friendfhip ; and fcrupled not 
to faciifice to his intriQ-ues the moil eflential inte- 
refts of their mafter. Elizabeth's ufual jealoufies 
with regard to her heirs began now to be levelled 
againfh James ; and as that prince had attained the 
years proper for marriage, fhe \^"as apprehenfive 
iefl:, by being flrengthened with children and alli- 
ances, he ihould acquire the greater interefl and 
authority with her EngHlli fubjecls. She directed 
Wotton to form a fecret concert with fome Scot- 
tiili noblemen, and to procure their promife that 
James, during three years, Ihould not on any ac-^ 
count be permitted to marry. In conf?quence of 
this view, they endeavoured to embroil him with 
the king of Denmark, who had fcnt ambaifadors to 
Scotland on pretence of demanding reditution of 
the Orkneys, but really with a view of opening a 
propofal of marriage between James and his daugh- 
ter. Wotton is faid to have employed his intrigues 
to purpofes ftill more dangerous. He formed, it 
is pretended, a confpiracy with fome malcontents, 

to 



ELIZABETH. 279 

to feize the perfon of the king, and to deliver him c H A P. 
into the hands of Elizabeth, who would probably ^JL,,^ 
have denied all concurrence in the dcfign, but ,586, 
would have been fure to retain him in perpetual 
thraldom, if not captivity. The confpiracy was 
detected, and "Wotton fled hadily from Scotland, 
without taking leave of the king \ 

James's fituation obliged him to diflemble his 
refentment of this traitorous attempt, and his na- 
tural temper inclined him foon to forgive and forget 
it. The queen found no difficulty in renewing the 
negotiations for a ftrid alliance between Scotland 
and England ; and the more effed:ually to gain the 
prince's friendfhip, fhe granted him a penfion equi- 
valent to his claim on the inheritance of his grand- 
mother, the countefs of Lenox, lately deceafed^ 
A league was formed between Elizabeth and James, 
for the mutual defence of 4heir dominions, and of 
their religion, now menaced by the open combi- 
nation of all the catholic powers of Europe. It 
was ftipulated, that if Elizabeth were invaded, 
James fliould aid her with a body of two thoufand 
horfe and five thoufand foot ; that Elizabeth, in a 
like cafe, fhould fend to his afiiftance three thoufand 
horfe and fix thoufand foot ; that the charge of thefe 
armies fhould be defrayed by the prince who de- 
manded alliftance ; that if the invafion fhould be 
made upon England, within fixty miles of the fron- 
tiers of Scotland, this latter kingdom fhould march 
its whole force to the affillance of the former ; and 
that the prefent league fliould fuperfede all former 
alliances of either ftate with any foreign kingdom, 
fo far as religion was concerned % 

By this league James fecured himfelf againfl all 
attempts from abroad, opened a way for acquiring 

y Melvil. * Spotfwood, p. 351. a Ibid. p. 349* 

Camden, p. 513, Rymer, torn. xv. p. tjoj, 

T4 the 



283 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

c H A p. the confidence and affeftions of the Englifli, and 
^^;^_^^_^ might entertain fome profpecl of domeflic tran- 
i5£6, quillity, which, while he Kved on bad terms with 
Elizabeth, he could never expect long to enjoy. 
Befides the turbulent difpofition and inveterate feuds 
of the nobilitv, ancient maladies of the Scottifh 
government, the I'pirit of fanaticifm had introduced 
a new diforder ; fo much the more dangerous, as 
religion, when corrupted by falfe opinion, is not 
reftrained by any rules of morahty, and is even 
fcarcely to be accounted for in its operations by any 
principles of ordinary conduct and policy. The in- 
folence of the preachers, who triumphed in their 
dominion over the populace, had at this time reached 
an extreme height ; and they carried their arrogance 
fo far, not only againll the king, but againlt the 
whole civil power, that, they excommunicated the 
archbifliop of St. Andj%w's, becaufe he had been 
adive in parliament for promoting a law which re- 
ftrained their fedirious fermons '' : Nor could that 
prelate fave himielf by any expedient from this ter- 
rible fentence, but by renouncing all pretenfions to 
ecclefiailical authority. One Giblon faid in the 
pulpit, that captain James Stuart (meaning the late 
earl of Arran) and his wife Jezebel had been deemed 
the chief perfecutors of the church ; but it was now 
feen that the king himfelf was the great offender : 
And for this crime the preacher denounced againft 
him the curfe which fell on Jeroboam, that he 
fhould die chikllefs, and be the laft of his race ". 

The fecretavy Thiriltone, perceiving the king fo 
much moiefted with ecclefiailical affairs, and with 
the refractory difpofition of the clergy, advifed him 
to leave them to their own courles : For that in a 
fhort time they would become fo intolerable, that 
the people would rife againft them, and drive them 

*• Spotfwood, p. 34.5, 746. "^ Ibid. j). 344.. 

cut 



ELIZABETH. iSj 

out of the country. " True," replied the king : Chap. 
" if I purpofed to undo the church and religion, ''^^^• 
" your counfel were good : But my intention is to '^^T^se ' 
" maintain both ; therefore cannot I fufler the 
*' clergy to follow fuch a conduit, as will in the 
*^, end bring religion into contempt and derifion ''Z* 

^ Spotfwood, p. 348* 



2Ba HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 



C-H A P. XLIL 



Zeal of the catholics Babington''s con/piracy- 



Mary affents to the conf piracy The confpirators 

fe'fzed and executed Refohdlon to try the queen 

of Scots The commijfioners prevail on her to 

fuhmit to the trial The trial Sentence 

agairijl Mary Interpofttion of king fames 

Reafons for the execution of Mary —The execu- 
tion Mary^s character The qucefi's affeded 

forrow Drake deftroys the Spanifb fleet at Cadi% 

Philip projects the invafion of England 

The in-vincible Armada Preparations in Eng- 
land The Armada arrives in the channel- 



Defeated A parliament Expedition againfi 

Portugal Affairs of Scotland, 



CHAP. fTpHE dangers which arofe from the character, 
XLll. J^ principles, and pretenfions of the queen ol 

^^^""^'^^ Scots, had very early engaged Elizabeth to confult, 
in her treatment of that unfortunate princefs, the 
diftates of jealoufy and politics, rather than of 
friendfhip or generofity : Refentment of this ufage 
had pufned Mary into enterprises which had nearly 
threatened the repofe and authority of EHzabeth : 
The rigour and reftraint, thence redoubled upon 
the capiive queen % flill impelled her to attempt 
greater extremities ; and while her impatience of 
confinement, her revenge '^j and her high fpirit, 

<^ Digges, p. J 39. Haynes, |». 607. 

^ Sec note [TJ ut the end of tlie volume, 

14 con* 



ELIZABETH. 283 

concurred with religious zeal, and the fuj^geftions of c n a p. 
defperate bigots, flie was at laft engaged in dciigns ^^^i'- 
which afforded her enemies, who watched the op- ^ ^.^^ 
portunity, a pretence or reafon for effeding her 
final ruin. 

The Englifli feminary at Rheims had wroug-ht Zcnicfihe 
themfeives up to a high pitch of rage and animoiity c^^'^^i-cs. 
againft the queen. The recent perfeatitions from 
which they had efcaped ; the new rigours which 
they knew awaited them in the courfe of their niif- 
fions ; the liberty which at prefent they enjoyed 
of declaiming againil that princefs ; and the contagion 
of that rehgious fury which every where furrounded 
them in France : All thefe caufes had obliterated 
with them every maxim of common fenfe, and every 
principle of morals or humanity. Intoxicated with 
admiration of the divine power and infallibility of 
the pope, they revered his bull, by which he excom- 
municated and depofed the queen ; and fome of 
them had gone to that height of extravagance as to 
affert, that that performance had been immediately 
diftated by the Holy Ghofl:. The aflaffination of 
heretical fovereigns, and of that princefs in parti- 
cular, was reprefented as the moll m.eritorious of 
all enterprifes ; and they taught that whoever 
periflied in fuch pious attempts enjoyed without dif- 
pute the glorious and never-fading crown of mar- 
tyrdom. By fuch doftrines they infligated John 
Savage, a man of defperate courage, who had ferved 
fome years in the Low Countries under the prince 
of Parma, to attempt the life of Elizabeth ; iind 
this affafiin having made a vow to perfe^^ere in his 
defign, was fent over to England and recommended 
to the confidence of the more zealous catholics. 

About the fame time, John Ballard, a pried of 
that feminary, had returned to Paris from his million 
in England and Scotland ; and as he had obferved a 
fpirit of mutiny and rebellion to be very prevalent 

among: 



2p4 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

c H A. P. among the catholic devotees in thefe countries, ha 
XLii. j^g^j founded on that difpofition the project of de- 
-, g^; throning Elizabeth, and of reftoring by force of 
a,rms the exercife of the ancient religion ^. The 
fituation of affairs abroad feemed favourable to this 
enterprife : The pope, the Spaniard, the duke of 
Guife, concurring in interefts, had formed a refo- 
lution to make fome attempt againd England : And 
Mendoza, the Spanifli ambalfador at Paris, llrongly 
encouraged Ballard t6 hope for fuccours from thefe 
princes. Charles Paget alone, a zealous catholic, 
and a devoted partifan of the queen of Scots, being 
well acquainted with the prudence, vigour, and ge- 
neral popularity of Elizabeth, always maintained 
that fo long as that princefs was allov/ed to live, it 
was in vain to expecl any fuccefs from an enterprife 
upon England. Ballard, perfuaded of this truth, 
faw more clearly the neceffity of executing the de- 
fign formed at Rheims : lie came over to England 
in the difguife of a foldier, and aifumed the name 
of captain Fortefcue : And he bent his endeavours 
to etfecl at once the project of an aflafTniation, an 
infurreclion, and an invafion ^. 
B3i)ing- The firfl perfon to whom he addreffed himfelf 

toifs con- ^^g Anthony Babington, of Dethic, in the county 
i>ijdcy. ^^, Derby. This young gentleman was of a good, 
family, poffefled a plentiful fortune, had difcovered 
an excellent capacity, and was accopipliflied in lite- 
rature beyond moll: of his years or Ilation. Being 
2ealoufly devoted to the catholic communion, he 
had fecretly made a journey to Paris fome time be- 
fore ; and had fallen into intimacy with Thomas 
Morgan, a bigoted fugitive from England, and with 
the bifhop of Glafgow, Mary's ambailador at the 
court of France. By continually extolling the ami- 
able accomplifiiments and heroical virtues of that 
princefs, they impelled the fanguine and unguarded 

8 Muvden's State Papers, p, 517. l» Camden, p. 515. 

mind 



t L i Z A B E T H. i*S-^ 

tnind of young Bablngton to make fome attempt C ii A P. 
for her fervice ; and they employed every principle ^^^J^ 
of ambition, gallantry, and religious zeal, to give ^^^^^ 
him a contempt of thofe dangers which attended 
any enterprife againfl the vigilant government df 
Elizabeth. Finding him well difpofed for their 
purpofe, they fent him back to England, and fe- 
cretly, unknown to himfelf, recommended him to 
the queen of Scots, as a perfon worth engaging in 
her fervice. She wrote him a letter full of friend- 
fliip and confidence ; and Babington, ardent in his 
temper, and zealous in his principles, thought that 
thefe advances now bound him in honour to devote 
himfelf entirely to the fervice of that unfortunate 
princefs. During fome time, he had found means 
of conveying to her all her foreign correfpondence ; 
but after ihe was put under the cuftody of fir Amias 
Paulet, and reduced to a more rigorous' confine- 
ment, he experienced fo much difficulty and danger 
in rendering her this fervice, that he had defiiied 
from every attempt of that nature. 

When Ballard began to open his intentions to 
Babington, he found his zeal fufpended, not ex- 
tinguifhed : His former ardour revived on the men- 
tion of any enterprife v/hich feemed to promife 
fuccefs in the caufe of Mary and of the catholic 
rehgion. He had entertained fentiments conform- 
able to thofe of Paget, and reprefented the folly of 
all attempts which, during the lifetime of Elizabeth, 
could be formed againfl the eflablifhed religion and 
government of England. Ballard, encouraged by 
this hint, proceeded to difcover to him the defigii 
undertaken by Savage ' ; and was well pleafed to 
obferve, that, inftead of being (hocked with the pro- 
ject, Babington only thought it not fecure enough, 
when entrufted to one fmgle hand, and propofed to 
join five others with Savage in this defperate enterprife. 

* Camden, p. 515. State Trials, p. 114. 

In 



2S6 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

C K A p. In profecution of ihefe views, Babington employed 
^^^'' himielf in iiicreafing the number of his affociates ; 
j^S5^ and he fecretly drew into the confpiracy many ca- 
tholic gentlemen difcontented with the prefent go- 
vernment. Barnv/el, of a noble family in Ireland, 
Charnoc, a gentleman of Lancaflhire, and Abing- 
ton, whole father had been cofferer to the houfehold, 
readily undertook the afiaffmation of the queen. 
Charles Tilney, the heir of an ancient family, and 
Tichborne of Southampton, when the defign was 
propofed to them, exprefled fome fcruples, which 
were removed by the arguments of Babington and 
Ballard. Savage alone refufed, during fome time, to 
fliare the glory of the enterprife with any others ^ ; 
he challenged the whole to himfelf ; and it was with 
fome difficulty he was induced to depart from this 
prepofterous ambition. 

The dehverance of the queen of Scots at the very 
fame inPtant when Elizabeth fiiould be alTaflinated, 
was requifite for efl-ecting the puvpofe of the confpi- 
rators ; and Babington undertook, with a party of 
a hundred horfe, to attack her guards while {he 
fhould be taking the air on horfeback. In this en- 
terprife he engaged Edward Windfor, brother to 
the lord of that name, Thomas Salifbury, Robert 
•Gage, John Travers, John Jones, and Henry 
Donne ; mod of them men of family and intereft. 
-The confpirators much v/anted, but could not find, 
any nobleman of note whom they might place at the 
head of the enterprife; but they trufted that the great 
events of the queen's death and Mary's deliverance 
would roufe all the zealous catholics to arms ; and 
that foreign forces, taking advantage of the general 
"confufion, would eafily fix the queen of Scots on the 
throne, and re-elfabliih the ancient religion. 

These defperate projects had not efcaped the 
vigilance of Ehzabeth's council, particularly of 

^ State Tiialsj voI.it (>. iii* 

Wal- 



ELIZABETH. 287 

Walfingham, fecretary of ftate. Tiiat artful ivA- chap. 
nilter had engaged Maud, a catholic pried, whom "^^il*. 
he retained in pay, to attend Ballard in his journey ^^^(,^ 
to France, and had thereby got a hint of the dcfigns 
entertained by the fugitives. Polly, another of his 
fpies, had found means to infmuate himfelf among 
the confpirators in England ; and though not entirely 
trufted, had obtained fome infight into their dan- 
gerous fecrets. But the bottom of the confpiracy 
was never fully known till Giii^brd, a feminary prieli, 
came over, and made a tender of his fervices to 
Walfmgham. By his means the difcovery became 
of the utmofl importance, and involved the fate of 
Mary, as well as of thofe zealous partifans of that 
princefs. 

Babington and his affociates, having laid fuch a 
plan as they thought promifed infallible fuccefs, 
were impatient to communicate the defign to the 
queen of Scots, and to obtain her approbation and 
concurrence. For this fervice they employed Gif- 
ford, who immediately applied to Walfmgham, that 
the interefl of that miniller might forward his fecret 
correfpondence with Mary. Walfmgham propofed 
the matter to Paulet, and defired him to connive at 
Gilford's corrupting one of his fervants : But Paulet, 
averfe to the introducing of fuch a pernicious pre-* 
cedent into his family, defired that they would rather 
think of fome other expedient. Gilford founjl 
a brewer, who fupplied the family with ale ; and 
bribed him to convey letters to the captive queen. 
The letters, by Paulet's contrivance, were thrull 
through a chink in the wall; and anfwers weie re- 
turned by the fame conveyance. 

Ballard and Babington were at firft diiEdent 
of Gilford's fidelity; and to make trial of him, they 
gave him only blank papers made up like letters: 
But finding by the anfwers that thefe had been faith- 
fully delivered, they laid afide all farther fcruple, and 
conveyed by his hands the moll criminal and dan- 
gerous 



>i^8 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, gerous parts of their confpiracy. Eabington in- 
xi.li. formed Mary of the defign laid for a foreign inva* 
,2^^ fion, the plan of an infurreftion at home^ the fcheme 
for her deliverance, and the confpiracy for affaffiliat^ 
ing the ufurper, by fix noble gentlemen as he termed 
them, all of them his private friends ; who, froih 
the zeal which thev bore to the catholic caufe, and 
her majefty's fervice, would undertake, the tragical 
Maiyaf. execution. Mary replied, that fhe approved highly 
co"nf^r '^^ ^^ ^^^^ defign ; that the gentlemen might exped all 
racy. the rewards which it fliould ever be in her power 
to confer ; and that the death of Elizabeth was a 
neceifary circumftance, before any attempts were 
made, either for her own deliverance or an infiir- 
reftion '. Thefe letters, with others to Mendoza, 
Charles Paget, the archbiihop of Glafgow, and fir 
Francis Ingleiield, were carried by Gitiord to fecre- 
. tary Walfmgham ; were decyphered by the art of 
Philips, his clerk, and copies taken of them. Wal- 
fmgham employed another artifice in order to obtain 
full infight into the plot: He fubjoined to a letter 
of Mary's a poftfcript in the fame cypher, in which 
he made her defire Babington to inform her of the 
names of the confpirators. The indifcretion of 
Babington furnifhed Walfingham with ftill another 
•means of detection as v/ell as of defence. That 
gentleman had caul'ed a picture to be drawn, where 
he himfelf was reprefented {landing amidft the fix 
affairins ; and a motto was fubjoined, exprelling that 
their common perils were the band of their confe- 
•deracy. A copy of this pidure was brought to 
■Elizabeth, that fhe might know the aifaffms, and 
guard herfelf againft their approach to her perfon. 
" -Meanwhile, Babington, anxious to enfure and 
haiten the foreign fuccours, refolved to difpatch 
Ballard into France j and he procured for him, under 

. •:* State Trials, vol. 5. p. 135. -Camden, p. 515. 
. ! 8 a feigned 



r. L I Z A B E T li. ^^ 

ti feigned name, a licence to travel. In order to chap. 
remove from himfelf all fufplcion, he applied to y^^li. 
Walfingham, pretended great zeal for the queen's 1^86. 
fervice, offered to go abroad, and profeffed his in- 
tentions of employing the confidence which he had 
gained among the catholics, to the detection and 
difappointment of their confpiracies. Walfingham 
commended his royal pufpofes ; and promifing his 
own counfel and alliftance in the execution of them, 
ftill fed hini with hopes, and maintained a clofe 
correfpondence with him^ A warrant, meanwhile, 
was ilfued for feizing Ballard ; and this incident, 
joined to the confcioufnefs of guilt, begat in all the 
confpirators the utmofl anxiety and concern. Some 
advifed that they fhould immediately make their 
efcape : Others propofed that Savage and Charnoc 
fhould without delay execute their purpofe agalnil 
Elizabeth; and Babington, in profecution of this 
fcheme, furnlfhed Savage wich money, that he 
might buy good clothes, and thereby have more 
eafy accefs to the queen's perfon. Next day they 
began to apprehend that they had taken the alarm 
too haflily ; and Babington having renewed his 
correfpondence with Walfingham, was perfuaded by 
that fubtle minlfter, that the feizure of Ballard had 
proceeded entirely from the ufual diligence of in- 
formers in the deteftion of poplfh and femlnary 
priefls. He even conlented to take lodgings fecretly 
in Walfingham' s houfe, that they might have more 
frequent conferences together, before his intended 
departure for France : But obferving that he was 
watched and guarded, he made his efcape, and gave the 
alarm to the other confpirators. They all took to 
flight, covered themfelves with feveral difguifes, and 
lay concealed in woods or barns ; but were foon dif- 
covered, and thrown into prifon. In their examina- The con- 
tions they contradifted each other; and the leaders ''p.'rafois 
v/ere obliged to make a full confeffion of the truth, executed, 
Vol. V. U Fourteen 



29© HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

c H A P. Fourteen were condemned and executed : Of whom 
^^^^^^^^^^ feven acknowledged the crime on their trial j the rell 

15S5. were convicted by evidence. 
September. ^HE lefler confpirators being difpatched, meafures 
were taken for the trial and convidion of the queen 
of Scots, on whofe account and with whofe concur- 
rence thefe attempts had been made againfl the life 
of the queen, and the tranquillity of the kingdom. 
Some of Elizabeth's counfellors were averfe to this 
procedure ; and thought, that the clofe confinement 
of a woman who was become very fickly, and who 
would probably put a fpeedy period to their anxiety 
by her natural death, might give fufRcient fecurity 
to the government, without attempting a meafure 
of which there fcarcely remains any exumple in hif- 
tory. Leicester advifed that Mary Ihould be fecretly 
difpatched by poifon, and he fent a divine to con- 
vince Walfingham of the lawfulnefs of that action : 
But Walfingham declared his abhorrence of it ; and 
ilill infifted, in conjunction with the majority of the 
counfellors, for the open trial of the queen of Scots. 
The fituation of England, and of the Englifh mi- 
nifters, had, indeed, been hitherto not a little dan- 
gerous. No fuccellbr of the crown was declared ; 
but the heir of blood, to whom the people in 
general were likely to adhere, was, by education, 
an enemy to the national religion ; was, from nml- 
tiplied provocations, an enemy to the minifters, and 
principal nobihty ; and their perfonal fafety, as well 
as the fafety of the public, feemed to depend alone 
on the queen's life, who was now fomewhat advanced 
in years. No wonder, therefore, that Elizabeth's 
counfellors, knowing themfelves to be fo obnoxious 
to the queen of Scots, endeavoured to pufli every 
meafure to extremities againfl her ; and were evea 
more anxious than the queen herfelf, to prevent her 
from ever mounting the throne of England. 

Thougk 



E L I Z A 1^ E T II. 291 

Though all England was acquainted with the de- c vi a r. 
tcftion of Babington's conipiracy, every avenue to ^^'li*. 
the queen of Scots had been fo ftridly guarded, that ,jjj6. 
Ihe remained in utter ignorance of the matter ; and 
it was a great furprile to her, when iir Thomas 
Gorges, by Elizabeth's orders, informed her, that 
all her accomplices were difcovered and arreiled. 
He chofe the time for giving her this intelligence 
when file was mounted on horleback to go a hunt- 
ing ; and flie was not permitted to return to her 
former place of abode, but was conducted from 
one gentlenian's houfe to another, till ihe was 
lodged in Fotheringay caftle in the county of North- 
ampton, which it was determined to make the lad 
ftage of her trial and fuflerings. lier two fecre- 
taries, Nau, a Frenchman, and Curie, a Scot, 
were immediately arrelled : All her papers were 
feized, and lent up to the council : Above fixty 
different keys to cyphers were difcovered : I'here 
were alio found many letters from perfons beyond 
fca, and feveral too from Englidi noblemen, con- 
taining exprellions of refpeft and attachment. The 
queen took no notice of this latter difcovery ; but the 
perfons themfclves, knowing their correfpondence 
to be detedcd, thought that they had no other means 
of making atonement for their imprudence, than 
by declaring themlelvcs thenceforth the moil inve- 
terate enemies of the queen of Scots "". 

It was refolved to try Mary, not by the common Rta^iuflon 
ftatute of treafons, but bv the aft which had palL-d "^ "y ^^.« 
the tormer year with a view to this very event ; scois. 
and the queen, in terms of that aft, appointed a 
commiflion, confifting of forty noblemen and privy- 
counfellors, and empowered them to examine and 
pafs fentence on Mary, whom flie denominated the 
late queen of Scots, and heir to James V. of Scot. 
land. 'I'he commillioncrs came to Fotheringay 

"» Camden, p. 518. 

U 2 caflle, 



292 HiStORf OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, caftle, and fent to her fir Walter Mildmay, fir Amlas 
^^J^f^ Paulet, and Edward Barker, who dehvered her a 
ijg6. Jetter from Elizabeth, informing her of the commif- 
fion, and of the approaching trial. Mary received 
the intelligence without emotion or aftonifhment. 
She faid, however, that it feemed flrange to her, 
that the queen fhould command her, as a fubjeft^ 
to fubmit to a trial and examination before fubjecls : 
That fhe was an abfolute independent princefs, and 
would yield to nothing which might derogate either 
from her royal majefty, from the ftate of fovereign 
princes, or from the dignity and rank of her fon : 
That, however opprefTed by misfortunes, fhe was 
not yet fo much broken in fpirit as her enemies flat- 
tered themfelves ; nor would fhe, on any account, 
be acceflary to her own degradation and diflionour : 
That fhe was ignorant of the laws and ftatutes of 
England ; was utterly deftitute of counfel; and could 
not conceive who were entitled to be called her peers, 
or could legally fit as judges on her trial : That 
though file had lived in England for many years, 
fhe had lived in captivity ; and not having received 
the protedion of the laws, fhe could not, merely by 
her involuntary refidence in the country, be fuppofed 
to have fubjeded herfelf to their jurifdiition : That, 
notwithflanding the fuperiority of her rank, fhe was 
willing to give an account of her conduct before an 
Enghfh parliament j but could not view thefe com- 
miffioners in any other light than as men appointed 
to juflify, by fome colour of legal proceeding, her 
condemnation and execution : And that fhe warned 
them to look to their confcience and their character, 
in trying an innocent perfon ; and to reflect, that 
thefe tranfadions would fomewhere be fubjeft to re- 
vifal, and that the theatre of the whole world was 
much wider than the kingdom of England. 

In return, the commilTioners fent a new deputa- 
tion, informing her that her plea, either from her 
royal dignity, or from her imprifonment, could 
1 o not 



ELIZABETH. 



293 



miilioners 
prevail on 
lier to fub- 
init to tUe 
triiJl. 



(( 



not be admitted ; and that they were empowered to chap. 
proceed to her trial, even though fhe Ihould refufe ^^3^ZLj 
to anfwer before them. Burleigh the treafurer, and j^%c, 
Bromley the chancellor, employed much reafoning The com 
to make her fubmjt ; but the perfon whofe argu- 
ments had the chief influence was fir Chriftopher 
Hattbn, vice-chamberlain. His fpeech was to this 
purpofe : " You are accufed, madam," faid he, 
** but not condemned, of having confpired the de- 
" flrudion of our lady and queen anointed. You 
^' fay you are a queen ; But in fuch a crime as this, 
and fuch a fituation as yours, the royal dignity 
itfelf, neither by the civil or canon law, nor by 
" the law of nature or of nations, is exempt from 
" judgment. If you be innocent, you wrong your 
*' reputation in avoiding a trial. We have been 
" prefent at your proteftations of innocence : But 
*' queen Elizabeth thinks otherwife ; and is heartily 
" forry for the appearances which lie againft: you, 
*' To examine, therefore, your caufe, fhe has ap- 
" pointed commiffioners ; honourable perfons, pru-- 
" dent and upright men, who are ready to hear you 
*' with equity, and even with favour, and will re-- 
^' joice if you can glear yourfejf of the imputations 
*' which have been thrown upon you. Believe me, 
" madam, the queen herfelf will rejoice, who af- 
** firmed to me at my departure, that nothing 
" which ever befel h^r had given her fo much un- 
*' eafinefs, as that you Ihould be fulpe6led of a con* 
" currence in thefe criminal enterprifes. Laying 
*' afide, therefore, the fruitlefs claim of privilege 
^' from your roval dignity, which can now avail you 
*' nothing, truft to the better defence of your in- 
" nocence, make it appear in open trial, and leave 
" not upon your memory that ftain of infamy 
" which mud attend yQur obftinate filence on this 
*' occafion".'* 



^ Camden, p. 5*3, 



Bv 



294 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, By this artful fpecch Mary was perfuaded to an- 
y^,.,!^ fwer before the court ; and thereby gave an appear- 
j^86. ance of legal procedure to the trial, and prevented 
thofe difficulties which the commiffioners muft have 
fallen into, had ffie perfevered in maintaining fo 
fpecious a plea as that of her fovereign and independ- 
ent character. Her conduct in this particular muft 
be regarded as the more imprudent ; becaufe for- 
merly, when Elizabeth's commiffioners pretended 
not to exeicife any jurifdiftion over her, and only 
entered into her caufe by her own confent and ap- 
probation, ffie declined juftifying herfelf, when her 
honour, which ought to have been dearer to her 
than life, feemed ^bfolutely to require it. 
The tiiiil. On her firit appearance before the commiffioners, 
Mary, either fenfible of her imprudence, or ftill un- 
wiUing to degrade herfelf by fubmitting to a trial, 
renewed her proteftation againll the authority of her 
judges : The chancellor anfwered her by pleading 
the fupreme authority cf the Engliili laws over every 
one who refided in England : And the commiffioners 
accommodated matters, by ordering both her pro- 
teftation and his anfwer to be recorded. 

The lawyers of the crown then opened the charge 
againft the queen of Scots. They proved, by in- 
tercepted letters, that ffie had allowed cardinal Allen 
and others to treat her as queen of England ; and 
that ffie had kept a correfpondence with lord Paget 
and Charles Paget, in view of engaging the Spaniards 
to invade the kingdom. Mary feemed not anxious 
to clear herfelf from either of thefe imputations. 
She only faid, that ffie could not hinder others from 
ufmg what ftyle they pleafed in writing to her ; and 
that ffie might lawfully try every expedient for the 
recovery of her liberty. 

An intercepted letter of her's to Mendoza was 
next produced ; in which ffie promifed to transfer 
to Philip her right to the kingdom of England, if 

her 



ELIZABETH. 295 

her fon fhould refufe to be converted to the catholic chap. 
faith, an event, flie there laid, of which there was i^^ji^ 
no expectation while he remained in the hands of his ,j8<, 
Scottifh fubjeds ''. Even this part of the charge Ihe 
took no pains to deny, or rather fhe ieeined to ac- 
knowledge it. She faid, that flie had no kingdoms 
to diipole of; yet was it la\Alui for her to give at 
her pleafure what was her own, and fhe was not ac- 
countable to any for her actions. She added, that 
file had formerly rejefted that propofal from Spain ; 
but now, fmce all her hopes in England were gone, 
file was fully determined not to refufe foreign affiit- 
ance. I'here was alio produced evidence to prove, 
that Allen and ParfonG were at, that very time ne- 
gotiating by her orders at Rome the conditions of 
transferring her Englilh crown to the king of Spain, 
and of difmheriting her heretical fon ^. 

It is remarkable, that Mary's prejudices againft 
her fon were at this time carried fo far, that fhe had 
even entered into a confpiracy againft him, had ap- 
pointed lord Claud Hamilton regent of Scotland, 
and had inftigated her adherents to feize James's 
perfon, and deliver him into the hands of the pope, 
or the king of Spain ; whence he was never to 
be delivered, but on condition of his becoming 
catholic ^. 

The only part of the charge which Mary poli- 
tively denied, was her concurrence in the defign of 
aifaflinating Elizabeth. This article, indeed, was 
the moft heavy, and the only one that could fully 
juftify the. queen in proceeding to extremities againlt 
her. In order to prove the accufation, there were 
produced the following evidence : Copies taken in 
fecretary Walfmgham's office of the intercepted let-* 
fers between her and Babington, in which her apprO" 

" State Trials, vol. i, p. 138. 

P See note [U] at ttie end of the volnme. 

1 See note [XJ at the end of the voiume, 

U 4 baiion 



2g6 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, bation of the murder was clearly expreiTed ; the 
XLir. evidence of her two fecretaries, Nau and Curie, who 
J 8(5^ had confelfed, without being put to any torture, 
both that fhe received thefe letters from Babington, 
and that they had written the anfwers by her order ; 
the confefTion of Babington, that he had written the 
letters and received the anfwers '', and the confefTion 
of Ballard and Savage, that Babington had {hewed 
them thefe letters of Mary written in the cypher, 
which had been fettled between them. 

It is evident, that this complication of evidence, 
though every circumftance corroborates the general 
conclufion, refolves itfelf finally into the teftimony 
of the two fecretaries, who alone were certainly ac- 
quainted with their miflrefs's concurrence in Babing- 
ton's confpiracy, but who knew themfelves expofed 
to all the rigours of imprifonment, torture, and 
death, if they refufed to give any evidence \vhich 
might be required of them. In the cafe of an ordi- 
nary criminal, this proof, with all its difadvantages, 
would be elteemed legal, and even fatisfadtory, if 
not oppofcd by fome other circumllances which 
fhake the credit of the witnefles : But or, the pre-, 
fent trial, where the abfolute power of the profecutor 
concurred with fuch important interefts, and fuch a 
violent inclination to have the princefs condemned ; 
the teftimony of two witnefles, even though men 
of charafter, ought to be fupported by flrong pro- 
babilities, in order to remove all fufpicion of tyranny 
and injuftice. The proof againft Mary, it muft be 
confefled, is not deflitute of this advantage 5 and it 
is difficult, if not impoflible, to account for Babing- 
ton's receiving an anfwer, written in her name, and 
in the cypher concerted between them, without al- 
lowing that the matter had been communicated to 
that princefs. Such is the light in which this matter 
appears, even after time has difcovered every thing 

H State Trials, vol. i. p. 113. 

which 



ELIZABETH. 



297 



which could guide our judgment with regard to it : C H a p. 
No wonder, therefore, that the queen of Scots, un- . ^•'■^''• 
aflifted by counfel, and confounded by fo extraordi- ,,ij6^ 
nary a trial, found herfelf incapable of making a fa- 
tisfa«5lory defence before the commillioners. Her 
reply confided chiefly in her own denial : Whatever 
force may be in that denial was much weakened, by 
her pofitively affirming, that fhe never had had any 
correfpond^nce of any kind with Babington ; a fact, 
however, of which there remains not the leaffc 
queftion '. She aflerted, th^t as Nau and Curie had 
taken an oath of fecrecy and fidelity to her, their 
evidence againll her ought not to be credited. She 
confeifed, however, that Nau had been in the fer- 
vice of her uncle, the cardinal of Lorraine, and had 
been recommended to her by the king of France, as 
a man in whom fhe might fafely confide. She alfa 
acknowledged Curie to be a very honefl man, but 
fnnple, and ealiiy impofed on by Nau. If thefc 
two men had received any letters, or had written 
any anfwers without her knowledge, the imputa-? 
tion, fhe faid, could never lie on her. And (he. 
was the more inclined, fhe added, to entertain this 
fufpicion againfi: them, becaufe Nau had, in other 
infiances, been guilty of a like temerity, and had 
ventured to tranfad: buHnefs in her name, without 
communicating the matter to her '. 

The fole circumftance of her defence, which tq 
us may appear to have fome force, was her re- 
quiring that Nau and Curie fhould be confronted 
with her, and her affirming, that they never would 
to her face perfift in their evidence. But that de- 
mand, however equitable, was not then fupported 
by law in trials of high treafon, and v/as often re- 
fufed, even in other trials where the crown was pro- 
fecutor. The claufe, contained in an aft of the r3th 
of the queen, was a novelty 5 that the fpecies of 

' See note [ Y] at the end of the volume. 
» See note [Z] at the end of the volume, 

treafon 



29? HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, treafon there enumerated muft be proved by two 
XLII. witnefl'es, confronted with the criminal. But Mary 
j<S6, "^^^^ ^^^ ^^^^^"^ upon that aft; and the miniflers and 
crown lawyers of this reign were always fure to re- 
fufe every indulgence beyond what the ftrift letter 
of the law, and the fettled practice of the courts of 
juftice, reqmred of them. Not to mention, that 
thefe fecretaiies were not probably at Fotheringay 
cafUe during the time of the trial, and could not, 
upon Mary's demand, be produced before the com- 
miffioners '. 

There palled two Incidents In this trial which 
may be worth obferving. A letter between Mary 
and Babington was read, in which mention was made 
of the earl of Arundel and his brothers : On hearing 
their names, fhe broke into a figh : " Alas,'^ faid 
ihe, " what has the noble houfe of the Howards 
'^ fuffered for my fake ?" She affirmed with regard 
to the fame letter, that it was eafy to forge the hand- 
writing and cypher of another ; flie was afraid that 
this was too familiar a pradice with Walhngham, 
who, file alfo heard, had frequently pracliled both 
againfl her life and her fon's. Walfmgham, who 
was one of the commiflioners, rofe up. He pro- 
tefled, that In his private capacity he had never 
acted any thing againfl the queen of Scots : In his 
public capacity, he owned, that his concern for his 
fovereign's fafetv had made him very diligent in 
fearching out, by every expedient, all defigns againfl 
her facred perfon or her authority. For attaining 
that end, he would not only make ufe of the aflifl- 
ance of Ballard or any other confpirator ; he would 
alio reward them for betraying their companions. 

» Queen Elizabeth was willing to have allowed Curie and Nau to toe 
\ produced in the trial, and wntts to that purpofe to J^nrleigh and Wal- 

fmgham, in her letter of the 7th of 06lober, in Forbes's MS. collec- 
tions, t^he only fays, that (he thinks it needlefs, though fhe was will- 
iftg to agree to it. The not confronting of the witndres was not the 
velult of defign, but the praftice of the age. 

14 But 



ELIZABETH. 



299 




But if he had tampered in any manner unbefitting his 
charafter and office, why did none of the late crimi- 
nals, either at their trial or execution, accufe him of ^^386. 
fuch praftices ? Mary endeavoured to pacify him, 
by faying that fhe fpoke from information ; and Ihe 
begged him to give thenceforth no more credit to 
fuch as flandered her, than {he ihould to fuch as 
accufed him. The great charafter, indeed, which 
fir Francis Walfingham bears for probity and honour, 
Ihould remove from him all fufpicion of fuch bafe 
arts as forgery and fubornation ; arts which even the 
mofl: corrupt minifters, in the mofl corrupt times, 
would fcruple to employ. 

Having finifhed the trial, the commillioners ad- ^sihoft. 
journed from Fotheringay caflle, and met in the 
Star Chamber at London ; where, after taking the 
oaths of Mary's two fecretaries, who voluntarily, 
without hope or reward, vouched the authenticity of 
thofe letters before produced, they pronounced feii- 
tence of death upon the queen of Scots, and con- 
firmed it by their feals and fubfcriptions. The fame Sentence 
day a declaration was publifhed by the commif- ag«i"'i 
fioners and the judges, " that the fentence did no '*'^* 
" wife derogate from the title and honour of James 
" king of Scotland ; but that he was in the fame 
" place, degree, and right, as if the fentence had 
" never been pronounced "." 

The queen had now brought affairs with Mary to 
that fituation which flie had long ardently defired -, 
and had found a plaufible reafon for executing ven- 
geance on a competitor, whom from the beginning 
of her reign fhe had ever equally dreaded and hated. 
But fhe was reflrained from inilantly gratifying her 
refentment, by feveral important confiderations. 
She forefaw the invidious colours, in which this ex- 
•^niple of uncommon jurifdidion would be repre- 

«♦ Camden, p. 526, 

fentcd 



!00 



HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 



CHAP, fented by the numerous partlfans of Mary, and the 
, ^''-H. reproach to which fhe herfelf might be expofed with 

^"^^"^^ all foreign princes, perhaps with all pofterity. The 
rights of hofpitality, of kindred, and of royal ma-, 
jefiy, feemed, in one fmgle inftance, to be all vio^ 
lated ; and this facrifice of generofity to intereft, of 
clemency to revenge, might appear equally unbe- 
coming a fovereign and a woman. Elizabeth, 
therefore, who was an excellent hypocrite, pre-, 
tended the utmoft relud'ance to proceed to the exe- 
cution of the fentence ; affecled the moft tender 
fympathy with her prifoner ; difplayed all her fcrur: 
pies and difficulties ; rejected the folicitation of her 
courtiers and minifters ; and affirmed, that were fhe 
jiot moved by the deepeft concern for her people's 
fafety, fhe would not hefltate a moment in pardon^ 
ing all the injuries which fhe berfeU had received^ 
from the queen of Scots. 

ajfth Oa. That the voice of her people might be more 
audibly heard in the demand of juflice upon Mary, 
fhe fummoned a new parliament; and fhe knew, 
both from the ufual difpofitions of that alTembly, 
and from the influence of her minifters over them, 
that fhe ihould not want the mofl earnefl folicitation 
to confent to that meafure, which was fo agreeable 
to her fecret inclinations. She did not open this 
aflembjy in perfon, but appointed for that purpofe 
three commiflioners, Bromley the chancellor, Bur* 
leigh the treafurer, and the earl of Derby. The 
reafon affigned for this meafure was, that the queen, 
forefeeing that the a|Fair of the queen of Scots would 
be canvaffed in parliament, found her tendernefs and 
delicacy fo much hurt by that melancholy incident, 
that fhe had not the courage to b^ prefent while it 
was under deliberation, but withdrew her eyes froni 
what flie coiild not behold without the utmoft re^ 
lu6lance and uneafmefs, She was alfo willing, that 
by this unufual precaution the people Ihould fee 

th& 



ttl 7. A B JLT n. 301 

the danger to which her perfon was hourly expofed ; Chap. 
and fliould thence be more Itrongly incited to take ^'-^i- 
vengeance on the criminal, whofe reftlefs intrigues j^j^^ 
and bloody confpiracies had fo long expofed her to 
the molt imminent perils \ 

The parliament anfwered the queen's expecta- 
tions : The fentence againfl Mary wao unanimouflv 
ratified by both houles ; and an application was voted 
to obtain Elizabeth's confent to its publication and 
execution ^', She gave an anfwer ambiguous, em- 
barrafl'ed ; full of real artifice, and feeming irrefolu- 
tion. She mentioned the extreme danger to which 
her life was continually expofed ; flie declared her 
willingnefs to die, did Ihe not forefee the great ca- 
lamities which would thence fall upon the nation ; 
fhe made profefTions of the greateit tendernefs to her 
people j flie difplayed the clemency of her temper, 
and expreffed her violent reludance to execute the 
fentence againfl her unhappy kinfwoman ; fhe 
affirmed, that the late law, by which that prin- 
cefs was tried, fo far from being made to en- 
fnare her, was only intended to give her warning 
beforehand, not to engage in fuch attempts as 
might expofe her to the penalties with which fhe was 
thus openly menaced ; and fhe begged them to thmk 
once again, whether it were poffible to find any ex- 
pedient, befides the death of the queen of Scots, for 
fecuring the public tranquillity ^. The parliament, 
in obedience to her commands, took the affair again 
under confideration ; but could find no other pof- 
fible expedient. They reiterated their folicitations, 
and intreaties, and arguments : They even remon- 
flrated, that mercy to the queen of Scots was cruelty 
to them, her fubjefts and children : And they 
affirmed, that it were injuflice to deny execution of 
the law to any individual ; much more to the whole 
body of the people, now unanimoully and earneflly 

* D'Ewes, p. 375, y IbiJ. p. 379. « IbiJ, p, 402, 40^ 



301 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, fuing for this pledge of her paternal care and ten-* 
XLir. dernels. This fecond addrefs let the pretended 
J gjT doubts and fcruples of Ehzabeth anew in agitation : 
She complained of her own unfortunate fituation ; 
expreiTed her uneafmefs from their importunity ; 
renewed the profellions of affeftion to her people ; 
and difmilfed the committee of parliament in an un- 
certainty, what, after all this deliberation, might be 
her final refolution *. 

BiTT though the queen afFefled relu6lance to exe- 
cute the fentence againil Mary, fhe complied with 
the requefl of parliament in publifhing it by procla- 
mation ; and this ad: feemed to be attended with the 
unanimous and hearty rejoicings of the people. 
Lord Buckhurft, and Beale clerk of the council, 
were fent to the queen of Scots, and notified to her 
the fentence pronounced againil her, its ratification 
by parliament, and the earneft applications made for 
its execution by that aflembly, who thought that 
their religion could never, while fhe was alive, at- 
tain a full fettlement and fecurity. Mary was no- 
wife difmayed at this intelligence : On the contrary, 
Ihe joyfully laid hold of the laft circumflance men- 
tioned to her ; and infilled, that fince her death was 
demanded by the proteftants for the eftablifhment of 
their faith, ilie was really a martyr to her religion, 
and was entitled to all the merits attending that glo- 
rious charadler. She added, that the Englifh had 
often embrued their hands in the blood of their h- 
vereigns : No wonder they exercifed cruelty againil 
her, who derived her defcent from thefe monarchs **. 
Paulet her keeper received orders to take down her 
canopy, and to ferve her no longer with the refpecl 
due to fovereign princes. He told her that fhe was 
now to be confidered as a dead perfon ; and incapable 
of any dignity '. This harlh treatment produced 

a See not [A A] at the end of the volume, 
^ Camden, p. 528. 
^ Jcbb, vol. ii. p, ^934 

^iU not 



ELIZABETH. 303 

not in her any feeming emotion. She only replied, chap. 
that flie received her rt)yal character from the hands ,^J^^J^ 
of the Almighty, and no earthly power was ever able j^g^^ 
to bereave her of it. 

The queen of Scots wrote her lafl: letter to Eliza- 
beth J full of dignity, without departing from that 
fpirit of meeknefs and of charity which appeared 
fuitable to this concludingn fcene of her unfortunate 
life. She preferred no petition for averting the fatal ' 
fentence : On the contrary, fhe exprelTed her grati- 
tude to Heaven for thus bringing to a fpeedy period 
her fad and lamentable pilgrimage. She requefted 
fome favours of Elizabeth, and intreated her that 
(he might be beholden for them to her own good- 
nefs alone, without making applications to thofe 
minifters who had difcovered fuch an extreme ma- 
lignity againft her perfon and her religion. She 
defired, that after her enemies Ihould be fatiated 
with her innocent blood, her body, which it was de- 
termined fliould never enjoy reft while her foul was 
united to it, might be configned to her fervants, and 
be conveyed by them into France, there to repofe in 
a catholic land, with the facred reliques of her mo- 
ther. In Scotland, Ihe faid, the fepulchres of her 
anceftors were violated, and the churches either de- 
molilhed or profaned ; and in England, where fhe 
might be interred among the ancient kings, her 
GWfi and Elizabeth's progenitors, flie could enter- 
tain no hopes of being accompanied to the grave 
with thole rites and ceremonies which her religion 
Irequired. She requefted that no one might have 
the power of infliding a private death upon her, 
without Elizabeth's knowledge ; but that her exe- 
cution (hould be public, and attended by her ancient 
fervants, who might bear teftimony of her perfe- 
verance in the faith, and of her fubmiilion to the 
will of Heaven. She begged that ihefe fervants 
might afterwards be allowed to depart whitherfoever 
they pleafed, and might enjoy thofe legacies which 

£hc 



k 



304 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

c H A P. fhe fhould bequeath them. And flie conjured her 
XLir. to grant thefe favours, by their near kindred; by 
J 55^^ the foul and memory of Henry VII. the common 
anceftor of both j and by the royal dignity, of which 
they equally participated^. Elizabeth made no an- 
fwer to this letter ; being unwilling to give Mary a 
refufal in her prefent fituation, and forefeeing incon^ 
veniencies from granting forhe of her requefts. 

While the queen of Scots thus prepared herfelf 
to meet her fate, great efforts were made by foreign 
powers with Elizabeth, to prevent the execution of 
the fentence pronounced againfl: her. Behdes em- 
ploying L'Aubefpine, the French refident at Lon- 
don, a creature of the houfe of Guife, Henry fent 
over Bellievre, with a profefled intention of inter- 
ceding for the life of Mary. The duke of Guife 
and the league at that time threatened very nearly 
the king's authority ; and Ehzabeth knew, that 
though that monarch might, from decency and po- 
licy, think himfeif obliged to interpofe pubHcly in 
behalf of the queen of Scots, he could not fecretly 
be much difpleafed with the death of a princefs, 
on whofe fortune and elevation his mortal enemies 
had always founded fo many daring and ambitious 
projects \ It is even pretended, that Bellievre had 
orders, after making public and vehement remon* 
ftrances againff the execution of Mary, to exhort 
privately the queen, in his mafter's name^ not to 
defer an acl of juftice, To neceifary for their com- 
mon fafety ^ But whether the French king's in- 
tercefiion were fmcere or not, it had no weight 
with the queen J and VaQ flill perfiiled in her former 
refolution. 
Interpo- The intcrpofition of the young king of Scots, 
j^j'^"" " though not able to change Elizabeth's determination, 
Jimes« feemed, on every account, to merit more regard. As 



^ Ca'inien, y>. 519. Jebb. vol. ii. p. 295. 
• CaimJ;n, p. 4.94. ^ Du Mauiier, 



fbon 



ELIZABETH. 305 

as foon as James heard of the trial and condemn- chap. 
ation of his mother, he fent fir William Keith, a ,J^^!i^ 
gentleman of his bed-chamber, to London; and ^^u. 
wrote a letter to the queen, in which he remon- 
ftrated in very fevere terms againft the indignity 
of the procedure. He faid, that he was aftoniflied 
to hear of the prefumption of EngUfli noblemen 
and counfellors, who had dared to fit in judgment 
and pafs fentence upon a queen of Scotland, de- 
fcended from the blood-royal of England ; but he 
was ftill more aflonifhed to hear, that thoughts were 
ferioufly entertained of putting that fentence in ex* 
ecution : That he entreated Elizabeth to refled: on 
the difhonour which Ihe would draw on her name 
by embruing her hands in the blood of her near 
kinfwoman, a perfon of the fame royal dignity, and 
of the fame fex with herfelf : That in this unpa- 
ralleled attempt fhe offered an affront to all diadems, 
and even to her ov/n, and by reducing fovereigns to 
a level with other men, taught the people to ne- 
glect all duty towards thofe whom Providence had 
appointed to rule over them : That for his part, he 
muff deem the injury and infult fo enormous, as to 
be incapable of all atonement ; nor was it poffible 
for him thenceforward to remain in any terms of 
correfpondence with a perfon who, without any pre- 
tence of legal authority, had deliberately inflicted an 
ignominious, death upon his parent : And that even 
if the fentiments of nature and duty did not infpire 
him with this purpofe of vengeance, his honour re- 
quired it of him ; nor could he ever acquit himfelf 
in the eyes of the world, if he did^not ufe every 
effort and endure every hazard to revenge fo great 
an indignity ^. 

Soon after, James fent the mailer of Gray and. 
fir Robert Melvil to enforce the remonllranccs of 
Keith J and to employ with the queen every expe- 

E Spotfwocd, p. 351. 

. Vol. V. X dient 



3o6 mSTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, dient of argument and menaces. Elizabeth was at 
XLii. ^j-||. offended with the Iharpnefs of thefe appllca- 
, g5 tions ; and fhe repHed in a like flrain to the Scottifh 
ambalfadors. When fhe afterwards reflected that 
this earnednefs was no more than what duty re- 
quired of James, flie was pacified ; but flill retained 
her refolution of executing the fentence againft 
Mary ''. It is believed, that the mafter of Gray, 
gained by the enemies of that princefs, fecretly gave 
his advice not to fpare her, and undertook, in all 
events, to pacify his mafter. 

The queen alfo, from many confiderations, was 
induced to pay fmall attention to the applications of 
James, and to difregard all the efforts which he 
could employ in behalf of his mother. She was 
well acquainted with his character and Interefls, the 
fadlons which prevailed among his people, and the 
inveterate hatred which the zealous proteftants, par- 
ticularly the preachers, bore to the queen of Scots, 
llie pre lent incidents fet thefe difpofitions of the 
ciei-gv In a full light. James, obferving the fixed 
purpoie of Elizabeth, ordered prayers to be offered 
up for iNlary in all the churches ; and knowing the 
captious humour of the ecclefiaftlcs, he took care 
that the form of the petition fhould be mofl cau- 
tious, as well as humane and charitable : " That it 
" might pleafe God to illuminate Mary with the 
" light of his truth, and fave her from the appa- 
*' rent danger with which fhe was threatened.'* 
But, excepting the king's own chaplains, and one 
clergyman more, all the preachers refufed to pollute 
their churche;^ by prayers for a papllf, and would 
.not fo much as prefer a petition for her converfion. 
James, unwilling or unable to punifh this dlfobedi- 
_ence, and defirous of giving the preachers an op- 
,portunity of amending their fault, appointed a new 
.day when prayeis fhould be faid for his mother j 



^ Spotfsvocid, p. 353, 



and 



I< L I Z A B E T n. 307 

and that he might at lead fecure himfelf from nny ctt ap. 
hifult in his own prefence, he defired the archbifhop ^^-^l- 
of St. Andrew's to ofliciate before him. In order i^j 
to difappoint this purpofe, the clergy inliigated one 
Coiiper, a voung man v/ho had not yet received 
holy orders, to take poifeilion of the pulpit early in 
the morning, and to exclude the prelate. When 
the king came to church, and faw the pulpit occu- 
pied by Couper, he called to him from his feat, and 
told him, that the place was deftined for another ; 
vet fmce he Was there, if he would obev the charge 
given, and remember the queen in his prayers, he 
might proceed to divine fervice. The preacher re* 
plied, that he v/ould do as the Spirit of God Ihould 
dired him. This anfwer fufficiently initrufted 
James in his purpofe ; and he commanded him to 
leave the pulpit. As Couper feemed not difpofed 
to obey, the captain of the guard v/ent to pull him 
from his place ; upon which the young man cried 
aloud. That this day would be a witnefs againft the 
king in the great day of the Lord ; and he de- 
nounced a woe upon the inhabitants of Edinburgh 
for permitting him to be treated in that manner'. 
The audience at firfl appeared defirous to take part 
with him ; but the fermon of the prelate brought 
them over to a more dutiful and more humane dif- 
pofition. 

EiJZAEETH, when folicitcd, either by Janies or 
by foreign princes, to pardon the queen of Scots, 
feemed always determined to execute the fentence 
againfl her : But when her miniflers urged her to 
interpofe no more delays, her fcruples and her hefi- 
tation returned ; her humanity could not allow her 
to embrace fuch violent and fanguinary meafures ; 
and (lie was touched with companion for the mif- 
fortunes, and with refpeft for the dignity, of the 
unhappy prifoner. The courtiers, fenhble that they 

* Spotfwood, p. 354. 

X 2 CQU,id 



3o8 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, could do nothing more acceptable to her, than to 
y^^^^^^^ employ perfuafion on this head, failed not to enforce 
J ^8 (5. every motive for the punifliment of Mary, and to 
combat all the objeftions urged againft this aft of 
Reafons jufticc. They faid that the treatment of that prin- 
cxecudon ^^^^ ^^ England had been, on her firfl reception, fuch 
ot Mary, as found Tcafon and policy required ; and if flie had 
been governed by principles of equity, fhe would 
not have refufed willingly to acquiefce in it : That 
the obvious inconveniences either of allowing her to 
retire into France, or of reftoring her by force to 
her throne, in oppofition to the reformers and the 
Englifh party in Scotland, had obliged the queen 
to detain her in England till time fhould offer fome 
~^ opportunity of ferving her, without danger to the 
kingdom, or to the proteitant religion: That her 
ufage there had been fuch as became her rank ; her 
ewn fervants in confiderable numbers had been per- 
mitted to attend her ; exercife had been allowed her 
for health, and all accefs of company for amufe- 
nient ; and thefe indulgences would in time have 
been carried farther, if by her fubfequent conduft 
ihe had appeared worthy of them : That after fhe 
had inftigated the rebellion of Northumberland, the 
confpiracy of Norfolk, the bull of excommunication 
of pope Pius, an invafion from Flanders ; after 
fhe had feduced the queen'^s friends, and incited 
every enemy, foreign and domeftic, againft her ; it 
became neceffary to treat her as a mofl: dangerous 
rival, and to render her confinement more ftrift and 
rigorous : That the queen, not with (landing thefe 
repeated provocations, had, in her favour, rejefted 
the importunity of her parliaments, and the advice 
of her fageft minifters ^ ; and was flill, in hopes of 
her amendmxent, determined to delay coming to the 
lafli extremities againft her : That Mary, even in 
this forlorn condition, retained fo high and un- 

^ Diggf;S, \), 276. Strype, vol. ii. p. 48. 135, 156, 139. 

' conquerable 



ELIZABETH. 



309- 



conquerable a fpirit, that flie afted as competitor to chap. 
the crown, and allowed her partifans every where, ^Lli. 
and in their very letters, addrefled to herfelf, to ,^35^ 
treat her as queen of England : That fhe had 
carried her animofity fo far as to encourage, in re- 
peated inltances, the atrocious defign of adaflinat- 
ing the queen ; and this crime was unqueftionably 
proved upon her by her own letters, by the evidence 
of her fecretaries, and by the dying confeffion of her 
accomplices : That (he wa5 but a titular queen, and 
at prefent poffeffed no where any right of fove- 
reignty ; much lefs in England, where the moment 
(he fet foot in the kingdom, Ihe voluntarily became 
fubject to the laws, and to Elizabeth, the only true 
fovereign : That even allowing her to be ftill the 
queen's equal in rank and dignity, felf-defence was 
permitted by a law of nature, which could never be 
abrogated ; and every one. Hill more a queen, had 
fufficient jurifdiftion over an enemy, who by open 
violence, and ftili more, who by fecret treachery, 
threatened the ytmoil danger againfl her life : That 
the general combination of the catholics to extermi- 
nate the proteftants was no longer a fecret ; and as 
the fole refource of the hitter perfecuted fe<St lay in 
Ehzabeth, fo the chief hope which the former en- 
tertained of final fuccefs, confifted in the perfon and 
in the title of the queen of Scots : That this very 
circumftance brought matters to extremity between 
thefe princelTes ; and rendering the life of one the 
death of the other, pointed out to Elizabeth the 
path, which either regard to felf-prefervation, or to 
the happinefs of her people, fliould direft her to pur- 
fue : And that neceffity, more powerful than policv, 
thus demanded of the queen that refolution which 
equity would authorize, and which duty prefcribed ^ 
When Elizabeth thought, that as many import 
tunities had been ufed, and as much delay interpofedj 

' Camtlen, p. 533. 

X 3 as 



3 JO HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, as decency required, fhe at lad determined to carry 
XLii. ^i^g fentence into execution : But even in this final 
15.2(5, refolution (he could not proceed without difplaying 
a new fcene ot duplicity and artifice. In order to 
alarm the vulgar, rumours were previoufly diiperfed 
that the Spanifh fleet was arrived in Milford Ha- 
ven ; that the Scots had made an irruption into 
England ; that the duke of Guife was landed in 
Suli'ex with a ftrong army ; that the queen of Scots 
was efcaped from prifon, and had raifed an army ; 
that the northern counties had begun an infurrec- 
tion ; that there was a new confpiracy on foot to 
aflaffmate the queen, and fet the city of London on 
fire ; nay, that the queen was a6tually affaliinated "", 
An attempt of this nature was even imputed to 
L'Aubeipine, the French ambjifiador ; and that 
miniller was obliged to leave the kingdom. The 
queen, affecting to be in terror and perplexity, was 
pbferved to fit much alone, penfive and filent ; and 
fometimes to mutter to herfelf half-fentences, im-- 
porting the difficulty and diftrefs to which flie was 
reduced". She at laft called Davifon, a man of 
parts, but eafy to be impofed on, and who had 
lately for that very reafon been made fecretary, and 
file ordered him privately to draw a warrant for the 
execution of the queen of Scots ; which, flie after-^ 
wards faid, fhe intended to keep by her, in cafe 
any attempt fhould be made for the deliverance of 
that princefs. She figned the warrant, and then 
comnianded Davifon to carry it to the chancellor, 
in order to have the great feai appended to it. Next 
day fhe fent Killigrew to Davifon, enjoining him to 
forbear, fome time, executing her former orders ; 
and when Daviibn came and told her that the war- 
rant had already palled the great feal, fhe feemed 
to be fomewhat moved, and blamed him for his 
precipitation. Davifon, being in a perplexity, ac- 

"* Capiden, j), 533. f' Ibitl. p. 534.. 

quainted 



ELIZABETH. 311 

qualnted the council with this whole tranfafllon ; C H a P. 
and they endeavoured to perfuade him to fend off ^^^^^^^ 
Beale with the warrant : If the queen fhould be dif- ,j8,, 
pleafed, they promifed to juftify his condud, and to 
take on themfelves the whole blame of this mea- 
fare ^ The fecretary, not fufficiently aware of their 
intention, complied with the advice; and the war- 
rant was difpatched to the earls of Shrewlbury and 
Kent, and fome others, ordering them to fee the 
fentence executed upon the queen of Scots. 

The two earls came to Fotheringay caftle, and 7th Fth. 
being introduced to Mary, inforn^ed her of their ^^^ ^^^' 
commiflion, and defired her to prepare for death 
next mornino- at eight o'clock. She feemed no-wife 
terrified, though fomewhat furprifed, with the intel- 
ligence. She faid, with a cheerful, and even a 
fmiling countenance, that flie did not think the 
queen, her lifter, would have confented to her death, 
or have executed the fentence againft a perfon not 
fubjed: to the laws and jurifdidion of England. 
" But as fuch is her will," faid fhe, " death, which 
" puts an end to all my miferies, fhall be to me 
" mod welcome ; nor can I efteem that foul worthy 
" the felicities of heaven, which cannot fupport the 
" body under the horrors of the lall paOage to thefe 
" blifsful manfions ^." She then requefled the two 
noblemen, that they would permit fome of her fer- 
vants, and particularly her confeffor, to attend her ; 
But they told her, that compliance with this laft de- 
mand was contrary to their confcience % and that 
Dr. Fletcher, dean of Peterborow, a man of great 
learning, Ihould be prefent to inflrutl her in the 

° It appears by fome letters published \iy Strype, vol. iii. book ii, 
c. I. that Elizabeth had not exprefsly coniimmieated her intention to 
any of her miiiilteis, not even to Burleigh : I'liey weic iuch expe» 
rienced ccurtieis, that they knew they could not gratify her inur? 
than by feiving her without waiting till Ihe deiired them. 

P Camden, p. 534. Jebb, vol. ii. p. 301. MS. in the Advocates 
Library, p. 2. from the Colt. Lib. Cat. c. 9. 

% Jebb, vol. ii. p. 30*, 

X 4 principles 



312 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, principles of true religion. Her refufal to have any 
ij^^^^^hj conference with this divine inflamed the zeal of 
,^87. the earl of Kent ; and he bluntly told her, that her 
death would be the life of their religion ; as, on the 
contrary, her life would have been the death of it. 
Mention being made of ]^abington, ihe cgnftantly 
denied his coufpiracy to have been at all known to 
her ; and the revenge of her wrongs fhe refigned 
into the hands of the Almighty. 

When the earls had left her, fhe ordered fupper 
to be haftened, that (he might have the more leifure 
after it, to hnifh the few affairs which remained to 
her in this world, and to prepare for her palfage to 
another. It was neceifary for her, fhe faid, to take 
fome fuflenance, lefl a failure of her bodily flrength 
fhould deprefs her fpirits on the morrow, and left her 
behaviour fhould thereby betray a weaknefs unworthy 
of herfelf '. She fupped Iparingly, as her manner ufu- 
ally was, and her wonted cheerfulnefs did not even 
defert her on this occafioi^. She comforted her fer^ 
yants under the affliftion which overwhelmed them, 
and which was too violent for them to conceal it 
from her. Turning to Burgoin, her phyfician, flie 
alked him. Whether he did not remark the great 
and invincible force of truth ^ " They pretend," faid 
fhe, " that I muft die becaufe I confpired againft 
" their queen's life : But the earl of Kent avowed, 
" that there was no other caufe of my death, than 
*' the apprehenfions which, if I fhould hve, they 
" entertain for their religion. My ccnftancy in the 
*' faith is my real crime ; The reft is only a colour, 
" invented by interefted and defigriing men." To- 
wards the end of fupper, fhe called in all her fervants, 
and drank to them : They pledged her, in order, 
on their knees, and craved her pardon for any pafl 
pegleft of their duty : She deigned, in return, to 
afk their pardon for her offences towards them j anc^ 

f Jcbb, vol. ii. p, 489, 

a plen* 



ELIZABETH. 313 

a plentiful effufion of tears attended this lafl: folemn chap. 
farewel, and exchange of mutual forgivenefs ^ kJ^^Z^^ 

Mary's care of her fervants was the fole remain- ,387. 
ing affair which employed her concern. She perufed 
her will, in which ihe had provided for them by 
legacies : She ordered th-e inventory of her goods, 
clothes, and jewels to be brought her ; and flie wrote 
down the names of thofe to whom flie bequeathed 
each particular : To fome flie diflributed money 
with her own hands ; and flie adapted the recom- 
pence to their different degrees of rank and merit. 
She wrote alfo letters of recommendation for her 
fervants to the French king, and to her coufm the 
duke of Guife, whom flie made the chief executor 
of her tefl;ament. At her wonted time flie went to 
]bed ; flept fome hours ; and then rifmg, fpent the reft 
of the night in prayer. Having forefeen the difficulty 
of exercifmg the rites of her religion, flie had had 
the precaution to obtain a confecrated hofl:e from the 
hands of pope Pius ; and Ihe had referved the ufe 
of it for this lad period of her life. By this expe- 
dient flie fupplied, as much as flie could, the want 
of a prieft and confeffor, who was refufed her \ 

Towards the morning, flie dreffed herfelf in a 
rich habit of filk and velvet, the only one which flie 
had referved to herfelf. She told her maids, that 
flie would willingly have left to them this drefs rather 
than the plain garb which flie wore the day before ; 
but it was neceffary for her to appear at the enfuing 
Solemnity in a decent habit. 

Thomas Andrews, fiieriff of the county, entered 
the room, and informed her that the hour was come, 
and that he muff attend her to the place of execu- 
tion. She replied. That fiie was ready ; a^d bid- 
ding adieu to her fervants, flie leaned on two of fir 



s Jebb, vol. ii. p. 302. 626, Camden, p. 534.. 
« Jebb, vol. ii, p. 489. 



Amias 



(( 



314 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP. Amias Paulet's guards, becaufe of an Infirmity In 
^^^^!^^]h. her limbs ; and ihe followed the fherift' with a ferene 
,^8^^ and compofed countenance. In pafling through a 
hall adjoining to her chamber, fhe was met by the 
earls of Shrewfbury and Kent, fir Amias Paulet, fir 
Drue Drury, and many other gentlemen of dlflinc- 
tion. Here (lie alfo found fir Andrew Melvil, her 
Howard, who flung himfelf on his knees before her ; 
and wringing his hands, cried aloud, '* Ah, Ma- 
*' dam ! unhappy me ! what man was ever before 
" the melTenger of fuch heavy tidings as I muft 
*' cany, when I fhall return to my native country, 
" and fhall report that I faw my gracious queen 
" and miftrefs beheaded in England ?'* His tears 
prevented farther Ipeech; and Mary too felt her- 
felf moved more from fympathy than affliclion. 
Ceafe, my good fervant," faid flie, " ceafe to 
lament : Thou hafl caufe rather to rejoice than 
to mourn : For now (halt thou fee the troubles of 
Mary Stuart receive their long-expected period 
and completion. Know," continued {he, " good 
fervant, that all the world at bed is vanity, and 
fubje^i fiill to more forrovv than a whole ocean of 
tears is able to bewail. But I pray thee carry this 
meifage from me, that I die a true woman to my 
religion, and unalterable in my affections to Scot- 
land and to France. Heaven forgive them that 
have long defired my end, and have thirfled for 
my blood as the hart panteth after the water- 
brooks. O God," added flie, " thou that 
art the Author of truth, and truth itfelf, thou 
knoweil the inmoll receffes of my heart : Thou 
knowell that I was ever defirous to preferve an 
entire union between Scotland and England, and 
to obviate the fource of all thefe fatal difcords. 
But recommend me, Melvil, to my fon, and tell 
him, that notwithltanding all my difireffes, ^ I 
have done nothing prejudicial to the ftale and 

" kingdom 



ELIZABETH. 315 

*' kingdom of Scotland.'* After thefe words, re- c h A p. 
dining herftlf, with weeping eyes, and face be- ^^^^l^^llm 
dewed with tears, flie kifled him. " And fo,'* faid j^g^^ 
fhe, " good Melvil, farewel : Once again, farewel, 
" good Melvil ; and grant the affillance of thy 
" prayers to thy qu-een and miflrefs ".** 

She next turned to the noblemen who attended 
her, and made a petition in behalf of her fervants, 
that they might be well treated, be allowed to enjoy 
the prelents which Hie had made them, and be fent 
fafely into their own country. Having received a 
favourable anfwer, fhe preferred another requeft, that 
they might be permitted to attend her at her death : 
In order, faid fhe, that their eyes may behold, and 
their hearts bear witnefs, how patiently their queen 
and miftrefs can fubmit to her execution, and how 
conilantly lire perfeveres in her attachment to her 
religion. The earl of Kent oppofed this defire, and 
told her, that they would be apt by their fpeeches 
and cries to difturb both herfelf and the fpeftators : 
He was alfo apprehenfive left they fhould praftife 
fome fuperftition not meet for him to fufter ; fuch 
as dipping their handkerchiefs in her blood : For 
that was the inftance which he made ufe of. " My 
" lord," faid the queen of Scots, " I will give 
" my word (although it be but dead) that they Ihall 
*' not incur any blame in any of the adions which 
" you have named. But alas! poor fouls ! it would 
*' be a great confolation to them to bid their mif- 
" trefs farewel. And I hope," added fhe, " that 
" your miftrefs being a maiden queen, would 
*' vouchfafe in regard of womanhood, that I fliould 
" have fome of my own people about me at my 
" death. I know that her majefty hath not given 
*' you any fuch ftritl command, but that you might 
" grant me a requtft of far greater courtefy, even 
" though I were a woman of inferior rank to that 

" MS. p. <j.. Jcbb, vol. ii, Y* ^34- Strype, vo'. iii. p. 384- 

" which 



31(5 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP. " which I bear.'* Finding that the earl of Kent 
^^^^ perfifted Hill in his refufal, her mind, which had for- 
,587. tified itfelf againfl: the terrors of death, was affed:ed 
by this indignity, for which flie was not prepared." 
'*' I am coufm to your queen," cried fhe, " and 
*« defcended from the blood -royal of Henry VIL 
" and ?- married queen of France, and an anointed 
" queen of Scotland." The commilTioners, per- 
ceiving how invidious their obftinacy would appear, 
conferred a little together, and agreed that fhe 
mio'ht carry a few of her fervants along with her. 
She made choice of four men and two maid-fervants 
for that purpofe. 

She then paffed into another hall, where was 
erefted the fcaffold, covered with black ; and fhe 
faw with an undifmayed countenance, the execu- 
tioners, and all the preparations of death. The 
room was crowded with fpeclators ; and no one was 
fo fleeled againfl all fentiments of humanity, as not 
to be moved when he reflefted on her royal dignity, 
conndering the furprifmg train of her misfortunes, 
beheld her mild but inflexible conftancy, recalled 
her amiable accompliflmients, or furveyed her beau- 
ties, which, though faded by years, and yet more 
by her afllidions, ftiil difcovered themfelves in this 
fatal moment. Here the warrant for her execution 
was read to her ; and during this ceremony fhe was 
filent, but fliewed in her behaviour an indiflerence 
and unconcern, as if the bufmefs had no-wife re- 
garded her. Before the executioners performed 
their office, the dean of Peterborow ftepped forth ; 
and though the queen frequently told him that he 
needed not concern himfelf about her, that fhe was 
fettled in the ancient catholic and Rorran religion, 
and that flie meant to lay down her life in defence of 
that faith ; he ftill thought it his duty to perfift in 
his leftures and exhortations, and to endeavour her 
converfion. The terms which he employed were, 
under colour of pious inflruclions, cruel infults on 

her 



ELIZABETH. 317 

her unfortunate fituatlon ; and befides their own ab- C H A p^ 
furdity, may be regarded as the mofl mortifying in- ,J^^J^ 
dignities to which ihe had ever yet been expofed. ,^557, 
He told her that the queen of England had on this 
occafion fhewn a tender care of her ; and notwith- 
Handing the puniftiment juftly to be inflifted on her 
for her manifold trefpafies, was determined to ufe 
every expedient for faving her foul from that de- 
ftrudion with which it was fo nearly threatened : 
That fhe was now Handing upon the brink of eter- 
nity, and had no other means of efcaping endlefs 
perdition, than by repenting her former wickednefs, 
byjuftifying the fentence pronounced againit her, by 
acknowledging the queen's favours, and by exert- 
ing a true and lively faith in Chrifl Jefus : That the 
fcriptures were the only rule of doftrine, the merits 
of Chrift the only means of falvation ; and if fhe 
trufted in the inventions or devices of men, flie mull: 
expe^l in an inftant to fall into utter darknefs, into 
a place where fhall be weeping, howling, and gnafh- 
ing of teeth : That the hand of death was upon her, 
the ax was laid to the root of the tree, the throne of 
the great Judge of heaven was erefted, the book of 
her life was fpread wide, and the particular fentence 
and judgment was ready to be pronounced upon 
her : And that it was now, during this important 
moment, in her choice, either to rife to the refurrec- 
tion of hfe, and hear that joyful falutation, Co7ne, ye 
bleffed of my Father ; or to fhare the refurreclion of 
condemnation, replete with forrow and anguifli ; 
and to fuffer that dreadful denunciation, Go, ye 
curfed^ into e-verlaji'mgjire ". 

During this difcourfe Mary could not fometimes 
forbear betraying her impatience, by interrupting 
the preacher ; and the dean, finding that fhe had 
profited nothing by his leclure, at laft bade her 
change her opinion, repent her of her former wic- 

^ MS. p. 8, 9, 10, II. Strypcj vol. lii. p. i%^, 

kednefs, 



3iS HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, kednefs, and fettle her faith upon this ground, that 
^^^!^^^li. only in Chrift Jefus could fhe hope to be faved. 
j^g^^ She anfwered, again and again, with great earnell- 
nefs : " Trouble not yourfelf any more about the 
" matter : For I was born in this religion ; I have 
**• lived in this religion ; and in this religion I am 
*' refolved to die." Even the two earls perceived, 
that it was fruitlefs to harafs her any farther with 
theological difputes ; and they ordered the dean to 
defift from his unfeafonable exhortations, and to pray 
for her converfion. During the dean's prayer, fhe 
employed herfelf in private devotion from the office 
of the Virgin ; and after he had finilhed, fhe pro- 
nounced aloud fome petitions in Englifh, for the 
afflifted church, for an end of her own troubles, for 
her fon, and for queen Elizabeth ; and prayed God, 
that that princefs might long profper, and be em- 
ployed in his fervice. The earl of Kent obferving 
that in her devotions fhe made frequent ufe of the 
crucifix, could not forbear reproving her for her at- 
tachment to that popifh trumpery as he termed it ; 
and he exhorted her to have Chrill in her heart, not 
in her hand ^. She replied with prefence of mind, 
that it was difficult to hold fuch an object in her 
hand without feeling her heart touched with fome 
compundion "". 

She now began, with the aid of her two women, 
to difrobe herfelf; and the executioner alfo lent his 
hand to affift them. She fmiled, and faid, that flie 
was not acculfomed to undrefs herfelf before fo large 
a company, nor to be ferved by fuch valets. Her 
fervants feeing her in this condition ready to lay her 
head upon the block, burft into tears and lamenta- 
tions : She tuiTied about to them ; put her finger 
upon her Hps, as a fign of impofmg filence upon 
them " ; and having given them her bleffing, de* 

y MS. p. 15. Jcbb, vol. ii. p. 307. 4.91. 637. ^ Jtbb, ibid. 

* Jebb, p. 307. 49i. 

c fired 



ELIZABETH. 319 

fired them to pray for her. One of her maids, CHAP, 
whom file had appointed for that purpofe, covered ,J^i^Ji^ 
her eyes with a handkerchief; flie laid herfelf down ,587. 
without any fign of fear or trepidation ; and her 
head was fevered from her body at two llrokes by the 
executioner. He inftantly held it up to the fpefta- 
tors, dreaming with blood, and agitated with the 
convulfions of death : The dean of Peterborow 
alone exclaimed, " So perifh all queen Elizabeth's 
*' enemies !" The earl of Kent alone replied, 
" Amen !'* The attention of all the other fpedators 
was fixed on the melancholy fcene before them ; and 
zeal and flattery alike gave place to prefent pity and 
admiration of the expiring princefs. 

Thus perilhed, in the forty-fifth yczv of her age, Mary's 
and nineteenth of her captivity in England, Mary charafter. 
queen of Scots ; a woman of great accomplifhments 
both of body and mind, natural as well as acquired ; 
but unfortunate in her fife, and during one period 
very unhappy in her conduct. The beauties of her 
perfon, and graces of her air, combined to make 
her the mofi: amiable of women ; and the charms of 
her addrefs and converfation aided the imprefiion 
which her lovely figure made on the hearts of all be- 
holders. Ambitious and active in her temper, yet 
inclined to cheerfulnefs and fociety ; of a lofty fpirit, 
conftant, and even vehement, in her purpofe, yet 
polite, and gentle, and affable in her demeanour ; 
file feemed to partake only fo much of the male 
virtues as to render her eftlmable, without relin- 
quifhing thofe foft graces which compofe the proper 
ornament of her fex. In order to form a jufl; idea 
of her character, we muft fet afide one part of her 
conduft, while fiie abandoned herfelf to the guid- 
ance of a profligate man ; and muft confider thefe 
faults, whether we admit them to be imprudences 
or crimes, as the refult of an inexplicable, though 
not uncommon, inconfiancy in the human mind, of 

the 



320 

CHAP, 
XLII. 



The 

queen's 
afFe^led 
forrow. 



HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

the frailty of our nature, of the violence of paffion, 
and of the influence v/hich fituations, and fometimes 
momentary incidents, have on perfons whofe prin- 
ciples are not thoroughly confirmed by experience 
and reflection. Enraged by the ungrateful condu6l 
of her hufband, feduced by the treacherous counfels 
of one in whom fhe repofed confidence, tranfported 
by the violence of her own temper, which never lay 
fufficiently under the guidance of difcretion, fhe was 
betrayed into actions which may with fome difficulty 
be accounted for, but which admit of no apology 
nor even of alleviation. An enumeration of her 
qualities might carry the appearance of a panegyric ; 
an account of her condud muft in fome parts wear 
the afpcdl of fevere fatire and inventive. 

Her numerous misfortunes, the folitude of her 
long and tedious captivity, and the perfecutions to 
which (he had been expofed on account of her re- 
ligion, had wrought her up to a- degree of bigotry 
during her later years ; and fuch were the prevalent 
fpirit and principles of the age, that it is the lefs 
wonder if her zeal, her refenrment, and her in- 
tereft uniting, induced her to give confent to a 
defign which confpirators, a6luated only by the firft 
of thefe motives, had formed againfl the life of 
Elizabeth. 

When the queen w^as informed of Mary's execu- 
tion, {lie affefted the utmofl furprife and indignation. 
Her countenance changed ; her fpeech faultered and 
failed her ; for a long time her forrow was lo deep that 
Ihe could not exprefs it, but flood fixed like a flatue in 
.filence and mute aftonifhment. After her grief was 
able to find vent, it burfl out into loud wailings and 
lamentation ; fhe put herfelf in deep mourning for 
this deplorable event ; and flie was feen perpetually 
bathed in tears, and furrounded only by her maids 
and women. None of her miniflers or counfellors 
dared to approach her j or if any had fuch temerity, 
7 fhe 



£ L I Z A B E T IT. 321 

file chafed them from her with the mofl violent chap. 
expreflions of rnp;e and refentment : They had all ^^^Ihj 
of them been guilty of an unpardonable crime, in ,587, 
putting to death her dear filter and kinfwoman, 
contrary to her fixed purpofe '', of which they were 
fufficiently apprifed and acquainted. • 

No fooner was her forrow fo much abated as to 
leave room for refledion, than fhe wrote a letter of 
apology to the king of Scots, and fent it by lir 
Robert Gary, fon of lord Hunfdon. She then told 
him, that flie wifhed he knew, but not felt, the 
unutterable grief which /he experienced, on account 
of that lamentable accident, which, without her 
knowledge, much lefs concurrence, had happened 
in England : That as her pen trembled when fhe 
attempted to write it, fiie found herfelf obliged to 
commit the relation of it to the meifenger, her 
kinfman ; who would likewife inform his majefcy 
of every circumftance attending this difmal and 
unlooked-for misfortune : That fhe appealed to the 
fupreme Judge of heaven and earth for her inno- 
cence ; and was alfo fo happy, amidft her other 
affliftions, as to find that many perfons in her court 
could bear vvitnefs to her veracity in this proteftation : 
That fhe abhorred diflimulation ; deemed nothino- 
more worthy of a prince than a fincere and open 
condu£l ; and could never furely be efteenied To 
bafe and poor-fpirited as that, if flie had really 
given orders for this fatal execution, fhe could on 
any confideration be induced to deny them : That, 
though fenfible of the juftice of the fentence pro- 
nounced againft the unhappy prifoner, fhe deter- 
mined, from clemency, never to carry it into exe- 
cution ; and could not but. refent the temerity of 
thofe who on this occafion had difappointed her 
jntention : And that as no one loved him more 
dearly than herfelf, or bore a more anxious concern 

b Camden, p. 5:5. Strype, vol. iii. Aj<pendix, p. 145. Jsbb, 
Vol. ii. p. 608. 

Vol. V. Y for 



322 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, for his welfare ; fhe hoped that he would confider 
XLir. every one as his enemy who endeavoured, on ac- 
, ,8-. count of the prefent incident, to excite any animofity 
between them ". 

In order the better to appeafe James, flie com- 
mitted Davifon to prifon, and ordered him to be 
tried in the Star Chamber for his mifdemeanour. 
The fecretary was confounded ; and being fenfible 
of the danger which muft attend his entering into 
a conteft with the queen, he exprefled penitence for 
his error, and fubmitted very patiently to be railed 
at by thofe very counfellors whofe perfuafion had 
induced him to incur the guilt, and who had pro- 
mi* cJ to countenance and protesEl him. He v;as 
condemned to imprifonment during the queen's 
pleafure, and to pay a fine of ten thoufand pounds. 
He remained a long time in cuilody ; and the fi]:ie, 
though it reduced him to beggary, was rigoroully 
levied upon him. All the favour which he could 
obtain from the queen, was fendiiig him fmall fup- 
piies from time to time to keep him from perilliing 
in neceflity ^ He privately wrote an apology to his 
friend Walfmgharn, which contains many curious 
particulars. T'he French and Scotch ambaffadors, 
he faid, had been remonflrating with the queen in 
Mary's behalf; and immediately after their depart- 
ure fhe commanded him, of her own accord, to 
deliver her the warrant for the execution of that 
princefs. She figned it readily, and ordered it to, be 
lealed with the great feal of England. She appeared 
in fuch good humour on the occahon, that fhe faid to 
him in a jocular manner, " Go tcil all this to Wal- 
'* hngham, who is nov/ lick : Though I fear he will 
" die of forrov/ when he hears of it." She added, 
that though fire had fo long delayed the execution, 
left jflie iliouid feem to be actuated by malice or 
cruelty, flie v/as all along fenhble of the neceiTity of 

- Camdenj 'jS 53C, SpotAvoot), p. 35)?, « Camden^ p. 538. 

it. 



ELIZABETH. 3^3 

I>. In the fame converfation fhe blamed Drury and cu a P. 
Paulet, that they had not before ea'ed her of this J^^:^^:^ 
trouble; and fhe exprefled a defire that Walfmg- ,53^, 
ham would bring them to compliance in that par-* 
ticular. She was fo bent on this purpofe, that fome 
time after flie afked Davifon, "Whether any letter 
had come from Paulet with regard to the fervice 
expefted of him ? Davifon fliewed her Paulet's let- 
ter, in which that gentleman pofitively refufed to a<5t 
any thing inconfiflent with the principles of honour 
and juftice. The queen fell into a paffion, and ac- 
cufed Paulet as well as Drufy of perjury ; becaufe^ 
having taken the oath of aifociation, in which they 
had bound themfelves to avenge her wrongs, they 
had yet refufed to lend their hand on this occafiort. 
" But others," fhe faid, " will be found lefs fcru- 
" pulous." Davifon adds, that nothing but the 
confent and exhortations of the vv^hole council could 
have engaged him to fend off the warrant : He was 
well aware of his dang-er ; and remembered that the 
queen, after having ordered the execution of the 
duke of Norfolk, had endeavoured, in a like man- 
ner, to throw the v/hole blame and odium of that 
aft-ion lipon lord Burleigh''. 

Elizabeth's diffimulation was fo grofs that it 
could deceive nobody who was not prcvioudy re- 
folved to be blinded ; but as James's concern fot 
his mother was certainly more iincere and cordial, 
he diicovered the higheft refentment, and refufed 
to admit Cary into his prefence. He recalled his 
ambaifddors from England ; and feemed to breathd 
hothincr but war and vengeance. The ftates of 
Scotland being aifcmbled, took part in his anger j 
and profeffed that they Vv^ere ready to fpend their 
lives and fortunes in revenge of his mother*s death, 
and in defence of his title to the crown of England. 

* Ca'Tiden, p. 53^. Strype, vol. lii. p. 375, 376. MS. in tbe 
AdvocafL-s' Library, A. 3. 28. p. 17. Fro.Tj die Cotr. Lib. Caiig, 
Ci 9, Biogr, B'ir. ^. 1625. 1627- 

Y 2 Many 



324 HISTORY OI* ENGLAND. 

C H A P. Many of the nobility inftigated him to take arms : 
,_J~J^ Lord Sinclair, when the courtiers appeared in deep 
,^87. mourning, prefented himfelf to the king, arrayed in 
complete armour, and faid, that this was the proper 
■ mourning for the queen. The catholics took the 
opportunity of exhorting James to make an alhance 
with the king of Spain, to lay immediate claim to 
the crown of England, and to prevent the ruin 
which, from his mother's example, he might con- 
clude would certainly, if Elizabeth's power prevail- 
ed, overv.'helm his perfon and his kingdom. The 
queen was fenfible of the danger attending thefe 
counfels ; and after allowing James fome decent in- 
terval to vent his grief and anger, Ihe employed her 
erniilaries to pacify him, and to fet before him every 
motive of hope or fear which might induce him to 
live in amity v^ith her. 

AValsingham wrote to lord Thirlflone, James's 
fecretary, a judicious letter to the fame purpofe. 
He faid. That he was much furprifed to hear of the 
violent refolutions taken in Scotland, and of the paf- 
lion difcovered by a prince of fo much judgment and 
temper as James : That a war, founded merely on 
the principle of revenge, and that too on account of 
an act of juftice which neceffity had extorted, would 
for ever be expofed to cenfure, and could not be 
excufed by any principles of equity or reafon : That 
if thefe views were deemed lefs momentous among 
princes, policy and interefl ought certainly to be at- 
tended to ; and thefe motives did flill more evidently 
oppofe all thoughts of a rupture with Elizabeth, 
and all revival of exploded claims to the Englifii 
throne : That the inequality between the two king- 
doms deprived James of any hopes of fuccefs, if he 
truiled merely to the force of his own ftate, and 
had no recourfe to foreign powers for affiftance: 
That the objeftions attending the introduftion of 
fuccours from a more potent monarch appeared fo 
evident from all the tranfadions of hiflory, that 

they 



ELIZABETH. 325 

they could not cfcape a perfon of the king*s exten- chap. 
five knowledge ; but there were, in the prefent cafe, '^^ILg 
feveral pecuhar circumflances, which ought for ever ,,g-, 
to deter him from having recourfe to fo dangerous 
an expedient : That the Frehch monarch, the an- 
cient ally of Scotland, might willingly ufe the affiil- 
ance of that kingdom againft England ; but would 
be difpleafed to fee the union of thefe two kingdoms 
in the perfon of James ; a union which would ever 
after exclude him from praclifing that policy former- 
ly fo ufeful to the French, and fo pernicious to the 
Scottifh nation : That Henry, befides, infefted with 
fadion and domeftic war, was not in a condition of 
fupporting diflant allies ; much lefs would he ex- 
po'c himfelf to any hazard or expence, in order to 
aggrandife a near kinfman of the houfe of Guife, 
the moll determined enem.ies of his repofe and au- 
thority : That the extenfive power and exorbitant 
ambition of the Spanifn monarch rendered him a 
flill more dangerous ally to Scotland ; and as he 
evidently afpired to an univerfal monarchy in the 
weft, and had in particular advanced fome claims to 
England, as if he were defcended from the houfe of 
Lancafter, he was at the fame time the common 
enemy of all princes who wiflied to maintain their 
independence, and the immediate rival and com- 
petitor of the king of Scots : That the queen, by 
her own naval power and her alliance with the Hol- 
landers, would probably intercept all fuccours v/hich 
might be fent to James from abroad, and be enabled 
to decide the controverfy in this iiland, with the fu- 
perior forces of her own kingdom, oppofed to thofe 
of Scotland : That if the king revived his mother's 
pretenfions to the crown of England, he muft alfo , 
embrace her religion, by which alone they could be 
juftified ; and muft thereby undergo the infamy of 
abandoning thofe principles in which he had been 
ilvidly educated, and to which he had hitherto re- 

Y 3 ligioufly 



32(5 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, llgloufly adhered : That as he would, by fuch an 
^f^J^^ apoftacy, totally alienate all the proteftants in Scot- 
,^37. land and England, he could never gain the con^- 
fidence of the catholics, who would itill entertaiu 
reafonable doubts of his . Inicerity : T'hat by ad- 
vancing a prefent claim to the crown, he forfeited 
the cenain profpeift of his fuccellion, and revived 
that national aniniofity which the late peace and al- 
liance between the kingdoms had happily extin- 
guifhed : That the whole gentry and nobility of 
England had openly declared themfeiyes for the 
execution of the queen of Scots ; and if James 
fhewed fuch violent refentrrient againfl that a6bof 
juftice, they would be obliged, for their own fecu-r 
rity, to prevent for eyer fo implacable a prince from 
ruling over them : And that, however fome perfons 
might reprefent his honour as engaged to feek ven-^ 
geance for the prefent affront and injury, the true 
honour of a prince confifted in wifdom and mode- 
ration and juftice, not in following the dictates of 
blind paflion, or in purfuing revenge at the expence 
of every motive and every interell*. Thefe confi- 
fierations, joined to the peaceable unambitious tem- 
per of the young prince, prevailed over his refent- 
nient ; and he fell gradually into a good correfpond- 
ence with the court of England. It is probable that 
the queen's chief obje6t in her diffimulatiqn with re- 
gard to the execution of Mary, was, that fiie might 
• thereby aiford James a decent pretence for renewing. 

his amity wjth her, on y.hich their mutual intereft 
fo much depended. 

While Elizabeth enfared trafiquiliiry from the 
attempts pf her nearefl neighbour, flie wus not ne- 
gligent of more diitant dangers. Hearing that Phi- 
lip, though he fcemed to diiTcmble the d-iiiy infults 
and injuries which he received from the Englifli, was 
ff cretly prepari|ig a great navy to attack her ; fhe 

f Stryjie, vol. iii, p. 377. Spotfwood, 

fern, 



ELIZABETH. 327 

Tent fir Francis Drake with a fleet to intercept his c n a P. 
fupplies, to pillage his coafl, and to deflroy his ,J^]hj 
fhippin;^. Drake carried out four capital fhips of j^g^. 
the queen's, and twenty-fix great and fmall, with 
which the London merchants, in hopes of fliaring 
in the plunder, had fupplied him. Llaving learned Drake de- 
from two Dutch fhips, which he met with in his ^[°^^ ^^'^ 
paflage, that a Spanifli fleet, richly laden, was lying cadiz. 
at Cadiz, ready to fet fail for Lifbon, the "rendez- 
vous of the intended Armada ; he bent his courfe to 
the former harbour, and boldly, as well as fortu- 
nately, made an attack on the enemy. He obliged 
fix gallies, which made head agalnil him, to take 
fhelter under the forts ; he burned about a hundred 
veflfels laden with ammunition and naval ftores ; 
and he deftroyed a great fhip of the marquis of 
Santa Croce. Thence he fet fail for Cape St. Vin- 
cent, and took by alTault the caftle fituated on that 
promontory, with three other fortreflTes. He next 
infulted Lifbon ; and finding that the merchants, 
who had engaged entirely in expectation of profit, 
were difcontented at thefe military enterprifes, he kt 
fail for the Terceras, with an intention of lying in 
wait for a rich carrack which was expected in thofe 
parts. Lie was fo fortunate as to meet with his 
prize ; and by this fhort expedition, in which the 
public bore fo fmall a fliare, the adventurers were 
encouraged to attempt farther enterprifes, the Eng- 
lifh feamen learned to defpife the great unwieldy 
/hips of the enemy, the naval preparations of Spain 
were deftroyed, the intended expedition againfl Eng- 
land was retarded a tv/elvemonth, and the queen 
thereby had leifure to take more fecure meafures 
againfl that formidable invafion ^. 

This year, Thomas Cavendifn, a gentleman of 
Devonfliire, Vv'ho had diifipated a good eflate by 

5 Camden, p. 54.0. Str William Monfon'a Naval Trp.f^s in 
t.liutthill's Voyiges, vol; iii. }). 156. 

y 4 li\'Tnp 



328 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

c H A P. living at court, being refoived to repair his fortune 
^J^j^^^h, at the expence of the Spaniards, fitted out three 
" ,^87. fhips at Plymouth, one of a hundred and twenty- 
tons, another of fixty, and a third of forty ; and 
with thefe fmail veiTels he ventured into the South 
Sea, and committed great depredations on the Spa- 
niards. He took nineteen velfels, fome of which 
were richly laden ; and returning by the Cape of 
Good Hope, he came to London, and entered the 
river in a kind of triumph. His mariners and fol- 
dlers were clothed in filk, his fails were of damafk, 
his top-fail cloth of gold ; and his prizes were 
elteemed the richefl that ever had been brought 
into England ^. 

The land enterprifes of the EngHlh were not, 
during this campaign, fo advantageous or honour- 
able to the nation. The important place of De- 
venter was intruded by Leicefter to William Stan-r 
ley, with a garrifon of twelve hundred Englifh ; 
and this gentleman, being a catholic, was alarmed 
at the difcovery of Babington's confpiracy, and be- 
came apprehenfive left every one of his religion 
ilrould thenceforth be treated with diftrufl in Eng- 
land. He entered into a correfpondcnce with the 
Spaniards, betrayed the city to them for a fum of 
money, and engaged the whole garrifon to defert 
with him to the Spanifh fervice. Roland York, who 
commanded a fort near Zutphen, imitated his ex- 
ample ; and the Hollanders, formerly difgufted with 
Leicefter, and fufpicious of the Englifh, broke out 
into loud complaints againft the improvidence, if 
not the treachery, of his adminiftration. Soon 
after he .himfeif arrived in the Lew Countries ; but 
his conduct was nowife calculated to give them fatif- 
fadion, or to remove the fufpicions which they had 
entertained againft him. The prince of Parma 
having befieged Sluys, Leicefter attempted to relieve 
the place, firft by fea, then by land j but failed in 

'' Birch's Memoirs, vol. i. p. 57. 

both 



ELIZABETH. 329 

both enterprifes ; and as he afcribed his bad fuccefs chap. 
to the ill behaviour of the Hollanders, they were i^^^Jil, 
equally free in refledions upon his conduct. The i^g^. 
breach between them became wider every day : 
They flighted his authority, oppofed his meafures, 
and neglecled his counfels ; while he endeavoured, 
by an imperious behaviour and by violence, to re- 
cover that influence which he had loft by his im-. 
prudent and ill-concerted meafures. He was even 
lufpe£led by the Dutch of a defign to ufurp upon 
their liberties ; and the jealoufy entertained againft 
him began to extend towards the queen herfelf. 
That princefs had made fome advances towards a, 
peace with Spain : A congrefs had been opened at; 
Bourbourg, a village near Graveline : And though, 
the two courts, elpecially that of Spain, had np; 
other intention than to amufe each of them its> 
enemy by negotiation, and mutually relax the pre-i 
parations for defence or attack, the Dutch, who; 
were determined on no terms to return under the, 
Spanifh yoke, became apprehenfive left their liberty 
fhould be facrificed to the political interefts of Eng-' 
land'. But the queen, who knew the importance 
of her alliance with the States during the prefent, 
conjunfture, was refolved to give them entire fatif- -lz 

faftion, by recalling Leicefter, and commanding him 
to refign his government. Maurice, fon of the late 
prince of Orange, a youth of twenty years of age, 
was elefted by the States governor in his place ; and 
Peregrine lord Willoughby was appointed by the 
queen commander of the Englifn forces. The 
meafures of thefe two generals were m^uch embar- 
rafled by the malignity of Leicefter, who had left a 
fa6lion behind him, and who ftill attempted, by 
means of his emilTaries, to difturb all the operations 
of the States. As foon as Elizabeth received intel- 
ligence of thefe diforders, ftie took care to redrefs 
them ; and ftie obliged all the partifans of England 

i Bentivoglio, part ii. lib. iv. Strype, vol. iv. N° 246. 

to 



330 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, to fall Into unanimity with prince Maurice ''. Bat 
^^^^^l^ though her good fenfe fo far prevailed over her 
j^Sj, partiality to Leicefter, fhe never could be made 
fully fenfible of his vices and incapacity : The 
fubmiiTions which he made her reflcred him to 
her wonted favour ; and lord Buckhurfl, who had 
accufed him of mifco'nducl in Holland, loft her 
confidence for fome time, and was even committed 
to cuftody. 

Sir Chriftopher Hatton was another favourite who 
-at this time received fome marks of her partiality. 
Though he had never followed the profeflion of the 
law, he was made chancellor in the place of Brom- 
ley deceafed ; but, notwithftanding all the expecl- 
ations and perhaps wilhes of the lawyers, he behaved 
in a manner not unworthy of that high ftation : His 
good natural capacity fupplied the place of expe- 
rience and ftudy ; and his decifions were not found 
deficient either in point of equity or Judgment, His 
enemies had contributed to this promotion, in hopes 
that his -abfence from court, while he attended the 
bufmefs of chancery, would gradually eftrange the 
queen from him, and give them an opportunity of 
undermining him in her favour, 
j^ss. These Httle intrigues and cabals of the court 

were filenced by the account which came from all 
quarters, of the vaft preparations made by the Spa- 
niards for the invafion of England, and for the en- 
Phiiippro- tire conqueft of that kingdom. Philip, though he 
jcds the j^^^ ^^ J. ^^ declared war, on account of the hoftili- 

jnvaiion of . T* i t-'t i i i • i 

England, ties which Elizabeth every where committed upon 
him, had long harboured a fecret and violent defire 
of revenge againft her. His ambition alfo, and 
the hopes of extending his empire, were m.uch en- 
couraged by the prefent profperous ftate of his 
affairs; by the conqueft of Portugal, the acquifi- 
■tlon of the Eaft-Indian commerce and fettlements, 

^ Rynier, torn, xv. p, 66, 

13 . and 



ELIZABETH. 331 

and the yearly importation ofvaft treafures from c HA?... 
America. The point on which he refled his high- ^^^^^[V^ 
eft glory, the perpetual object of his policy, was to j^gg. 
llipport orthodoxy and exterminate herefy ; and as 
the power and credit of Elizabeth were the chief 
bulwark of the proteftants, he hoped, if he could 
fubdue that princefs, to acquire the eternal reno^vn 
of re -uniting the whole Chriftian world in the ca-; 
tholic communion. Above all, his indignation 
againfl his revolted fubjects in the Netherlands 
inftigated him to attack the Englifli, who had en- 
couraged that infurredion, and who, by their vici- 
nity, were fo well enabled to fupport the Hollanders, 
that he could never hope to reduce thefe rebels 
while the power of that kingdom remained entire 
and unbroken. To fubdue England feemed a ne- 
cgfl'ary preparative to the re-eilablifliment of his 
authority in the Netherlands ; and notwithftanding 
appearances, the former was in itfelf, as a more 
important, fo a more eafy undertaking than the lat- 
ter. That kingdom lay nearer Spain than the Low 
Countries, and was more expofed to invafions from 
that quarter ; after an enemy had once obtained en- 
trance, the difficulty feemed to be over, as it was 
neither fortified by art or nature ; a long peace had 
deprived it of all military diicipline and experience j 
and the catholics, in which it flill abounded, would 
be ready, ;t was hoped, to join any invader who 
ihould free them, from thofe perfecutions under 
which they laboured, and fliouid revenge the death 
of the queen of Scots, on whom they had fixed all, 
their affections. The fate of England muft be 
decided in one battle at fea. and auQther at land ; 
and what comparifon between the EngliPn and 
Spaniards^ either in point of naval force, or in the 
numbers, reputation, and veteran bravery of their 
armies? Befides.the acquifition of fo great a king- 
fionij fuccefs againll England enfured the imme- 
diate 



33it HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, di'ate fubjedion of the Hollanders, who, attacked 
yj^^^^^hj ort every hand, and deprived of all fupport, muft 
35S8. y'l^^d their ftubborn necks to that yoke which they 
had fo long refilled. Happily this conqueft, as it 
was of the utmofl importance to the grandeur of 
Spain, would not at prefent be oppofed by the jea- 
loufy of other powers, naturally fo much interefted 
to prevent the fuccefs of the enterprife. A truce 
was lately concluded with the Turks ; the empire 
was in the hands of a friend and near ally ; and 
France, the perpetual rival of Spain, was fo torn 
with inteftine commotions, that fhe had no leifure 
to, pay attention to her foreign inter efts. This fa- 
vourable opportunity, therefore, which might never 
again prefent itfelf, muft be feize<;l, and one bold 
effort made for acquiring that afcendant in Europe, 
to which the prefent greatnefs and profperity of the 
Spaniards feemed fo fully to entitle them '. 

These hopes and motives engaged Philip, not- 
withftanding his cautious temper, to undertake this 
hazardous enterprife ; and though the prince, now 
created by the pope duke of Parma, when con-r 
fulted, oppofed the attempt, at lead reprefented the 
neceiTity of previoufly getting poffelfion of fome 
fea-port town in the Netherlands, which might 
aflFord a retreat to the Spanifh navy "", it was deter- 
mined by the catholic monarch to proceed imme- 
diately to the execution of this ambitious project. 
During fome time he had been fecretly making 
preparations ; but as foon as the refolution was 
fully taken, every part of his vaft empire refounded 
with the noife of armaments, and all his minifters, 
generals, and admirals, were employed in forward- 
ing the defign. The marquis of Santa Croce, a 
fea officer of great reputation and experience, was 



1 Camden. Strype, vol. iii. p. 51- 
^ iientivoglio, part ii. lib. jy. 



deftined 



ELIZABETH. 



33^ 



deftined to command the fleet ; and by his counfels chap- 
were the naval equipments conducted. In all the ^^li. 
ports of Sicily, Naples, Spain, and Portugal, ar- ^""J^ 
tifans were employed in building veffels of uncom- The in- 
mon fize and force ; naval (lores were bought at vincibje 
a great expence ; provifions amaifed ; armies levied ^' 

and quartered in the maritime towns of Spain ; and 
plans laid for fitting out fuch a fleet and embarlca- 
tion as had never before had its equal in Europe. 
The military preparations in Flanders were no hfs 
formidable. Troops from all quarters were every 
moment aflembiing, to reinforce the duke of Parma. 
Capizuchi and Spinelli conduced forces from Italy : 
The marquefs of Borgaut, a prince of the houfe of 
Auitria, levied troops In Germany : The Walloon 
and Burgundian regiments were completed or 
augmented : The Spanilh infantry was fupplied 
with recruits ; and an army of thirty-four thoufand 
vaen was aifembled in the Netherlands, and kept in 
readinefs to be tranfported into England. The 
duke of Parma employed all the carpenters whom 
he could procure, either in Flanders or in Lower 
Germany, and the coafts of the Baltic ; and he built 
at Dunkirk and Newport, but efpecially at Ant- 
werp, a great number of boats and flat-bottomed 
veflTeis, for the tranfporting of his infantry and 
cavalry. The mofl renowned nobility and princes 
of Italy and Spain were ambitious of fliaring in the 
honour of this great enterprife. Don Amadseus of 
Savoy, don John of Medicis, Veipafian Gonzaga, 
duke of Sabionetta, and the duke of Pafl:rana, 
haflened to join the army under the duke of Parma. 
About two thoufand volunteers in Spain, many of 
them men of family, had enlifted in the fervice. 
No doubts were entertained, but fuch vaft prepa- 
rations, conducted by officers of fuch confummate 
•fldll, muft finally be fuccefsful. And the Spaniards, 
oftentatious of their power, and elated with vain 

15 hopes. 



I 



5312^ HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP. hopeSj had already denominated their navy the h\* 

^^^^^^ n.nncihk Armada. 
t^gg. News of thefe extraordinary preparations fooh 
reached the court of London ; and notwithftanding 
the fecrecy of the Spanifli council, and their pre- 
tending to employ this force in the Indies, it was 
eafily concluded^ that they meant to make fome 

Prepara- effort againll England. The queen had fofefeeii 

England. ^^ invafion ; and finding that fhe mufl now con- 
tend for her crown with the whole force of Spaifi, 
fhe niade preparations for ref ftiince ; nor was (he 
dlfmayed with that power by which all Europe 
apprehended fhe muft of neceffity be overwhelmed. 
Her force indeed feemed very unequal to refifi: fo po- 
tent an enemy. All the failors in Englar.d amount- 
ed at that time to about fourteen thoufand men ". 
The fize ot the Englifh flupping was in general fo 
fmall, that except a few of the queen's fbips of war, 
there were n'ot four veffels belonging to the mer- 
chants, which exceeded four hundred tons*^. The 
royal navy confifted only of twenty-eight fail p, 
many of Vv'hich were of fmall fize ; none of them 
exceeded the bulk of our largeft frigates, and m.ofl 
of them deferved rather the name of pinnaces thart 
of fhips. The only advantage of the Engllfh fleet 
confifted in the dexterity and courao-e of the feamen, 
who, being accuftomed to fail in tempeftuolis feaSj 
and expofe thenifdves to all dangers, as much ex- 
, ceeded in this particular the Spanifli manners, as' 

their veffels were inferior in fize and force to thofe of 
that nation ''. All the commercial towns of England 
were required to furnilh foips for reinforcing this 
fmall navy ; and they difcovered on the prefent oc- 
cafion great alacrity in defending their liberty and 
reli"-iun againft thofe imminent perils with which 
they were menaced. The citizens of London, in 
order to fliew their zeal in the common caufe, 

n" Mon.bn, p. 256. > ° H^'d. p. i68. 

P Ibid. p. 157. "i Ibid. j). 311. 

inftea4 



ELIZABETH. 335 

inflead of fifteen veflels which they were commanded chap. 
to equip, voluntarily fitted out double the number '. ^^l^^i^ 
The gentry and nobility hired, and armed, and ,jgg. 
manned, forty-three fhips at their own charge ' ; 
and all the loans of money which the queen de- 
manded were frankly granted by the perfons ap- 
plied to. Lord Ploward of Effingham, a man of 
courage and capacity, was admiral, and took on 
him the command of the navy : Drake, Hav/kins, 
and Frobifher, the mofl renowned feauien in Eu- 
rope, ferved under him. The prijicipal fleet was 
ftationed at Plymouth. A fm.aller fquadron, con- 
fifting of forty vefTels, Englifn and Flemifh, was 
commanded by lord Seymour, fecond fon of pro- 
tector Somerfet ; and lay off Dunkirk, in order to 
intercept the duke of Parma. 

The land forces of England, compared to thofe 
of Spain, pofTefTed contrary qualities to its naval 
power : They were more numerous than the enemy, 
but much inferior in difcipiine, reputation, and 
experience. An army of twenty thoufand men was 
diipofed in different bodies along the fouth coafl ; 
and orders were given them, if they could not 
prevent the landing of the Spaniards, to retire 
backwards, to wafte the country around, and to wait 
for reinforcement from. the neighbouring counties, 
before they approached the enem^y. A body of 
twenty-two thoufand foot, and 'a thoufand horfe, 
under the command of the earl of Leiceftcr, was 
ftationed at Tilbury, in order to defend the capital. 
The principal army confifled of thirty-four thoufand 
foot and two thoufand horfe, and was commianded 
by lord Hunfdon. Thefe forces were referved' for 
guarding the queen's pcrfon, and were appointed 
to march whitherfoever the enemy fhould appear. 
The fate of England, if ail the Spanifli armies 
fhould be able to land, feemed to depend on the 

' Monfon, p. 267. « Lives of tl|e Adqiials, vol. i. p. 4-51. 

ifTue 



^3<? HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP. ifTue of a fingle battle ; and men of reflection entef* 
^J^^^' tained the moft difmal apprehenfions, when they 
j^gg^ confidered the force of fifty thoufand veteran Spa- 
niards, commanded by experienced officers, under 
the duke of Parma, the moft confummate general 
of the age ; and compared this formidable arma- 
ment with the military power, which England, not 
enervated by peace, but long difufed to war, could 
mufter up againft it. 

The chief fupport of the kingdom feemed to 
' confift in the vigour and prudence of the queen's 
conduct ; who, undifmayed by the prefent dangers, 
iflued all her orders with tranquillity, animated her 
people to a fteady refiftance, and employed every 
refource which either her domeltic fituation or her 
foreign alliances could afford her. She fent fir 
Robert Sidney into Scotland, and exhorted the king 
to remain attached to her, and to confider the 
danger which at prefent menaced his fovereignty no 
lefs than her own, from the ambition of the Spanifh 
tyrant ' : The ambaffador found Jam.es well difpofed 
to cultivate a union with England, and that prince 
even kept himfelf prepared to march \vith the force 
of his whole kingdom to the afliftance of Elizabeth. 
Her authority with the king of Denmark, and the 
tie of their comimon religion, engaged this monarch, 
upon her appHcation, to feize a fquadron of fhips 
which Philip had bought or hired in the Danifh 
harbours " : The Hanfe Towns, though not at that 
time on good terms with Elizabeth, were induced 
by the fame motives to retard fo long the equip- 
ment of fome veffels in their ports, that they be- 
came ufelefs to the purpofe of invading England. 
All the proteftants throughout Europe regarded this 
€;nterprife as the critical event, which was to decide 

^ She made him fome promiTes which (he never fulfilled, to give 
bim a dukedom In Engl;ind, vvlih fuitable lands and revenue, to fettle 
£000 1. a-) ear on him, and pay him a guard, for the fafety of his per- 
lon. From a MS. of lord ftoj tton's. 

» Strype, vol, iii. p. fa^.. 

for 



ELIZABETH. 



3J7 



foT, ever the fare of their religion ; and though un- c H A P. 
able, by reafon of their dif lance, to join their force ^^Lll. 
to that of Elizabeth, they kept their eyes fixed on ,.gg^ 
her conduiSl: and fortune, and beheld with anxiety, 
mixed with admiration, the intrepid countenance 
with which Ihe encountered that dreadful tempeft 
which was every moment advancing towards her. 

The queen alio was fenfible that, next to the 
general popularity which flie enjoyed, and the con- 
hdence which her fubjeds repofed in her prudent 
government, the hrmeft fupport of her throne con- 
fided in the general zeal of the people for the pro- 
teftant religion, and the llrong prejudices which they 
had imbibed againft popeiy. She took care, on the 
prefent occafion, to revive in the nation this attach- 
ment to their own feet, and this abhorrence of the 
oppofite. The Enghfh were reminded of their for. 
mer danger from the tyranny of Spain : All the 
barbarities exercifed by Mary againfi the proteftants 
were afcribed to the counfels of that bigoted and 
imperious nation : The bloody malTacres in the v 

Indies, the unrelenting executions in the Low- 
Countries, the horrid cruelties and iniquities of the 
inquifition, were fet before men's eyes : A liil and 
defcription was publiHied, and pictures difperfed, of 
the feveral inftruments of torture with which, it was 
pretended, the Spanifh Armada was loaded : And 
every artifice, as well as reafon, was employed to 
animate the people to a vigorous defence of their 
religion, their laws, and their liberties. 

But while the queen, in this critical emergence, 
roufed the animofity of the nation againft popery, 
fhe treated the partifans of that feet with modera- 
tion, and gave not way to an uiidiftinguifhing fury 
againft them. Though llie knew that Sixtus Ouir 
tus, the prefent Pope, famous for his capacity and 
his tyranny, had fulminated a new bull of excom- 
munication againft her, had depofed her, had ab- 
folved her fubje^ls from their oaths of allegiance. 

Vol. V. Z had 



338 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

C H A P. had publiflied a crufade againfl England, and had 
i^^^^^..^^^,.^ granted plenary indulgences to every one engaged 
is8S. i^ the prefent invafion ; (he would not believe that 
all her catholic lubjecls could be lb blinded, as to 
lacrifice to bigotry their duty to their fovereign, 
and the hberty and independence of their native 
country. She rejected all violent counfels, by which 
ilie was urged to feek pretences for difpatching the 
leaders of that party : She would not even confine 
any confiderable number of them : And the catho- 
lics, fenfible of this good ufage, generally expreiTed' 
great zeal for the public fervice. Some gentlemen 
of that feci, conicious that they could not jullly ex- 
pert any truft or authority, entered themfelves as 
volunteers in the fieet or army " : Some equipped 
fhips at their own charge, and gave the command 
of them to proteftants : Others were active in ani- 
mating their tenants, and vaffals, and neighbours, 
to the defence of their country : And every rank of 
men, burying for the prefent all party diflinctions, 
feemed to prepare themfelves with order as well as 
vigour to refill the violence of thefe invaders. 

The more to excite the martial fpirit of the 
nation, the queen appeared on horfeback in the 
camp at Tilbury ; and riding through the lines, dif- 
covered a cheerful and animated countenance, ex- 
horted the foldiers to remember their duty to their 
country and their religion, and profelfed her inten- 
tion, though a woman, to lead them herfelf into the 
field againft the enemy, and rather to perifh in 
battle than furvive the ruin and llavery of her peo- 
ple ". By this fpirited behaviour fhe revived the 
tendernefs and adm.iration of the foldiery : An at- 
tachment to her perlon became a kind of enthufiafm 
among them : And they alkcd one another. Whe- 
ther it were poffibie that Enghihmen could abandon 
this glorious caule, could difplay lefs fortitude than 

^'e. p. 7f7. 

loie [B/'J at the cmJ of the' volume. 

appeared 



ELIZABETH. 339 

appeared In the female fex, or could ever by any chap. 
dangers be induced to relinquifh the defence of their ^J^^^^^I^ 
heroic princefs ? i^gg, ' 

The Spanifli Armada was ready in the beginning 
of May, but the moment it was preparing to failj 
the marquefs of Santa Croce, the admiral, was feized 
with a fever, of which he foon after died. The 
vice-admiral, the duke of Paliano, by a ftrange 
concurrence of accidents, at the very fame time 
fullered the fame fate ; and the king appointed for 
admiral the duke of Medina Sidonia, a nobleman 
of great family, but unexperienced in aftion, and 
entirely unacquainted with fea affairs. Alcarede was 
appointed vice-admiral. This misfortune, befides 
the lofs of fo great an officer as Santa Croce, retard- 
ed the faihng of the Armada, and gave the Enghfh 
more time for their preparations to oppofe them. 
At lall, the Spanifh fleet, full of hopes and alacrity, 
fet fail from Lifbon ; but next day met with a vio- 29th May; 
lent tempeft, which fcattered the fhips, funk fome 
of the fmalleft, and forced the reft to take fhelter in 
the Groine, where they waited till they could be re- 
fitted. When news of this event was carried to 
England, the queen concluded that the defign of an 
invafion was difappointed for this fummer ; and be- 
ing always ready to lay hold on every pretence for 
laving money, (he made Walfingham write to the 
admiral, directing him to lay up fome of the larger 
Ihips, and to difcharge the feamen : But lord Effing- 
ham, who was not fo fanguine in his hopes, ufed 
the freedom to difobey thefe orders ; and he begged 
leave to retain all the fliips in fervice^ though it 
fliould be at his own expence ^'. He took advantage 
of a north wind, and failed towards the coaft of Spain, 
with an intention of attacking the enemy in their 
harbours : but the wind ehanoin-ir to the fouth, he 



y Camcien, p. 54.5. 

Z 3 becam«« 



I 



340 



HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 



CHAP, became apprehenfive left they might have fet fail, 

-^^^^- and by palling him at fea, invade England, now 

1588. expofed by the abfence of the fleet. He returned, 

therefore, with the iitmoft expedition to Plymouth,- 

and lay at anchor in that harbour. 

Meanwhile, all the damages of the Armada 
were repaired ; and the Spaniards with frefli hopes 
fet out again to fea, in prolccution of their enterprife. 
1 he fleet confilted of a hundred and thirty veflels, 
of which near a hundred were galleons, and were of 
greater fize than any ever before ufed in Europe. 
It carried on board nineteeen thoufand two hundred 
and ninety-live foldiers, eight thoufand four hundred 
and fifty-fix mariners, two thoufand and eighty- 
eight galley-Haves, and two thoufand fix hundred 
and thirty great pieces of brafs ordnance. It was 
victualled for fix months ; and was attended by 
twenty leflier fliips, called caravals, and ten falves 
with fix oars a-piece^ 

The plan formed by the king of Spain was, that 
the Armada Ihould fail to the coafl oppofite to Dun- 
kirk and Newport ; and having chafed away all 
Englilh or Elemirn veffels, which might obllrud; 
the palfage (for it was never fuppofed they could 
make oppofition), Ihould join themfelves with the 
duke of Parma, fhould thence make fail to the 
Thames, and having landed the whole Spanifh army, 
thus complete at one blow the entire conqueft of 
England. In profecution of this fcheme, Philip 
gave orders to the duke of Medina, that in paffing 
along the channel, he fhould fail as near the coall 
of France as he could with fafety ; that he fliould 
by this policy avoid meeting with the Englifli fleet ; 
and, keeping in view the main enterprife, fhould 
neglect all fmaller fuccelTes, which might prove an 
obftacie, or even interpofe a delay, to the acqui- 
lition of a kingdom ''. After the Armada was under 

^ Strypc, vol. iii. .Appendix, p. 221. ^ Moiiibn, p. i??- 

15 fi^il> 



E L I Z A B E T II. 



341 



£iil, they took a fiflierman, who informed them that chap. 
the Knglini admiral had been hitely at fea, had heard ^^!1. 
of the tempefl: Mdiich fcattered the Armada, had re- i^gg. 
tired back into Plymouth, and no longer expecling 
an.invafion this feafon, had laid up his fhips, and 
difcharged moft of the feamen. From this falfe in- 
telligence the duke of Medina conceived the great 
facility of attacking and deflroying the Englifh fhips 
in harbour ; and he was tempted by the profpetl of 
fo decifive an advantage to break his orders, and 
make fail directly for Plymouth : A refoliition which 
proved the fafety of England. The Lizard was the 19th July* 
hrft land made by the Armada, about funfet ; and '^"^^'- 
as the Spaniards took it for the Ram-head near i-ivesiiithe 
Plymouth, they bore out to fea with an intention of <-han"ei. 
returning next day, and attacking the Englifli navy. 
They were defcried by Fleming, a Scottiili pirate, 
who was roving in thofe feas, and who immediately 
fet fail to inform the Englifh admiral of their ap- 
proach ": Another fortunate event which contributed 
extremely to the fafety of the fleet. Eflingham had 
jufl time to get out of port, when he faw the Spanifli 
Armada coming full fail towards him, difpofed in the 
form of a crefcent, and ftretching the diftance of 
feven miles from the extremity of one divifion to 
that of the other. 

The writers of that age raife their flyle by a 
pompous defcription of this fpeclacle ; the mofl 
magnificent that had ever appeared upon the ocean^ 
infufmg equal terror and admiration into the minds 
of all beholders. I'he lofty maffs, the fwelling fails, 
and the towering prows of the Spanifli galleons, feem * 

impofTible to be juflly painted, but by afluming the 
colours of poetry ; and an eloquent hiflorian of 
Italy, in imitation of Camden, has afierted, that the 
Armada, though the fhips bore every fail, yet ad- 

= Monfon, p. 138. 

Z J vanced 



342 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, vanced with a flow motion ; as if the ocean groane4 
XLli. ^yi^i^ fupporting, and the winds were tired with im- 
1588, pehiiig? fo enormous a weight '^. The truth, how- 
ever, is, that the largeft of the Spanilh veflels would 
fcarcely pafs for third rates in the prefent navy, of 
England ; yet were they fo ill framed, or fo ill go- 
verned, that they were quite unwieldy, and could 
not fail upon a wind, nor tack on occafion, nor be 
managed in ftormy weather by the feamen. Nei- 
ther the mechanics of fliip-building, nor the expe- 
rience of mariners, had attained fo great perfeftion 
as could ferve for the fecurity and government of 
fuch bulky veifels ; and the Englifh, who had already 
had experience how unferviceable they commonly 
were, beheld without difmay their tremendous ap- 
pearance. 

Effingham gave orders not to come to clofe 
fight with the Spaniards ; where the fize of the iliipSj 
he fufpe6led, and the numbers of the foldiers, would 
be a difad vantage to the Englifh ; but to cannonade 
them at a diftance, and to wait the opportunity 
which winds, currents, or various accidents, mull 
afford him, of intercepting fome fcattered veiTels of 
the enemy. Nor was it long before the event an- 
fwered expedlation. A great fliip of Bifcay, on 
board of which was a confiderable part of the Spanifh 
money, took fire by accident ; and while all hands 
were employed in extinguifhing the flames, flie fell 
behind the reft of ,the Armada : The great galleon 
of Andalufia was detained by the fpringing of her 
maft : And both thefe veiTels were taken after fome 
refiftance, by fir Francis Drake. As the Armada 
advanced up the channel, the Englifli hung upon its 
rear, and flill infefted it with fkirmiflies. Each trial 
abated the confidence of the Spaniards, and added 
courage to the Enghih j and the latter foon found, 

<? JBentivoglio, part ii. lib. 4. 

that 



ELIZABETH. 343 

that even In clofe fight the fize of the Spaniih fhips c h a P- 
was no advantage to them. Their bulk expofcd ^J^J^ 
them the more to the fire of the enemy ; while their ,j88. 
cannon, placed too high, ihot over the heads of the 
Enghfh. The alarm having now reached the coad 
of England, the nobihty and gentry hadened out 
with their vellels from every harbour, and reinforced 
the admiral. The earls of Oxford, Northumber- 
land, and Cumberland, fir Thomas Cecil, fn- Ro- 
bert Cecil, fir Walter Raleigh, fir Thomas Vavafor, 
fir Thomas Gcrrard, fir Chailes Blount, with many 
others, dillinguiihcd themfelves by this generous 
and difinterelted fervice of their country. The 
Englifh fleet, after the conjunction of thofe fhips, 
amounted to a hundred and forty fail. 

The Armada had Jiow reached Calais, and cafl 
anchor before that place ; in expectation that the 
duke of Parma, who had gotten intelligence of their 
approach, would put to lea and join his forces to 
them. The Englifli adm.iial practifed here a fuc- 
cefsful ftratagem upon the Spaniards, He took 
eight of his finaller fhips, and filling them with all 
combuflible materials, fent them one after another 
into the midft of the enemy. The Spaniards fancied 
that they were firefliips of the fame contrivance with 
a famous veifel which had lately done fo much exe- 
cution in the Schelde near Antwerp ; and they im- 
mediately cut their cables, and took to flight with 
the greatefl diforder and precipitation. The Eng- 
iifli fell upon them next morning while in confufion ; 
and belides doing great damage to other fhips, they 
took or deffroyeJ about twelve of the enemv. 

By this time it was become apparent, that the 
intention for which thefe preparations were made by 
the Spaniards, w^as entirely fruftrated. The veifcls 
provided by the duke of Parma were made for 
tranfporting foldiers, not for fighting ; and that ge- 
neral, when urged to leave the harbour, pofitively 

Z 4 refufed 



^'^4 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, refufed to expofe his flourifhing army to fuch ap- 
x^^l^lhj parent hazard ; while the Englifli not only were able 
J588. to keep the fea, but feemed even to triumph over 
their enemy. The Spanifh admiral found, in many 
rencounters, that while he loft fo confiderable a 
part of his own navy, he had deftroyed only one 
fmall velfel of the Englifh ; and he forefaw, that 
by continuing fo unequal a combat, he muft draw 
inevitable deftruClion on all the remainder. He 
prepared therefore to return homewards ; but as 
the wind was contrary to his paffage through the 
channel, he refolved to fail northwards, and mak- 
ing the tour of the illand, reach the Spanifh har- 
bours by the ocean. The Knglifh fleet followed 
him during fome time ; and had not their ammu- 
nition fallen fhort, by the negligence of the offices 
in fupplying them, they had obliged the whole 
Armada to lurrcnder at difcretion. The duke of 
Medina"^ had once taken that refoiution ; but was 
diverted from it by the advice of his confeflbr. 
This conclufion of the cnterprife would have been 
more glorious to the Englifli ; but the event proved 
Defested. almolt equally fatal to the Spaniards. A violent 
tem.peft overtook the Armada after it paifed thl: 
Orkneys : The fhips had already loft their anchors, 
and were obliged to keep to fea : The mariners, 
unaccuftomed to fuch hardfliips, and not able to 
govern fuch unwieldy veffels, yielded to the fury 
of the ftorm, and allowed their Ihips to drive either 
on the weftern ifles of Scotland, or on the coaft of 
Ireland, where they were miferably wrecked. Not 
a half of the na.vy returned to Spain ; and the fea- 
men as well as foldiers who remained, were fo over- 
come with hardfhips and fatigue, and fo difpirited 
by their difcomfiture, that they filled all Spain with 
accounts of the defperate valour of the Englifli, and 
of the tempeftuous violence of that ocean which fur- 
rounds them. 

Such 



ELIZABETH. 



345 



V Such was the milerable and dlflionourable con- Ciia'p. 
clufion of an enterprife which had been preparing ^J^^' 
tor three years, which had exhaufted the revenue ^^^^i. 
and fprce of Spain, and which had long filled all 
3i!urope with anxiety or expeclation. Philip, who 
was a flave to his ambition, but had an entire com- 
mand over his countenance, no fooner heard of the 
mortifying event which biafted all his hopes, than 
he fell on his knees, and rendering thanks for that 
gracious difpeniation of Providence, exprefied his 
joy that the calamity was not greater. I'he Spanifii 
priefts, who had fo often blell this holy crufade, and 
foretold its infaUible fuccefs, were fomewhat at a 
lofs to account for the vl6lory gained over the ca- 
tholic monarch by excommunicated heretics and an 
execrable ufurper : Eat they at lad difcovered, that 
aH the calamities of the Spaniards had proceeded 
from their allowing the infidel Moors to live among 
them ". 

Soon after the defeat and difperfion of the Spanifh ";*'9' 
Armada, the queen fummoned a new parliament; '^^^ 
and received from them a fupply ot two fublidies 
and four fifteenths, payable in four years. This is 
the firll inftance that fubfidies were doubled in one 
fupply; and fo unufual a conceflion was probably 
obtained from the joy of the prefent fuccefs, and 
from the general ((^n\e of the queen's necefiities. 
Some members objecled to this heavy charge, on 
account of the great burthen of loans which had 
lately been impofed upon the nation ^ 

Elizabeth forefaw, that this houfe of commons, A parlla- 
like all the foregoing, would be governed by the "'^"'' 
puritans ; and therefore, to obviate their enterprifes, 
ihe renewed at the beginning of the feffion her ufual 
injunclion, that the parliament fhould not on any 
account preiume to treat of matters eccleiiallical. 
Notwithflanding this flrict inhibition, the zeal of 

" See note [CC] at ihe end of tlie volume. 
f See note [DDj at the end of tlie volume. 

one 



346 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, one Damport moved him to prefent a bill to the 
^^^^' commons for remedying fpiritual grievances, and 
j,g for reftraining the tyranny of the ecclefiaftical com- 
miflion, which were certainly great : But when Mr. 
fecretary V/oley reminded the houfe of her majefly's 
commands, no one durll fecond the motion ; the 
bill was not fo much as read ; and the fpeaker re- 
turned it to Damport without taking the lead no- 
tice of it ^. Some members of the houfe, notwith- 
flanding the general fubmiffion, were even com- 
mitted to cuftody on account of this attempt *". 

The imperious conduct of Elizabeth appeared 
flill more clearly in another parliamentary tranfac- 
tion. The right of purveyance was an ancient pre- 
rogative, by which the officers of the crown could 
at pleafure take provifions for the houfehold from 
all the neighbouring counties, and could make ufe 
of the carts and carnages of the farmers ; and the 
price of thefe commodities and fervices was fixed 
and ftated. The payment of the money was often 
diftant and uncertain ; and the rates, being fixed 
before the difcovery of the Weft Indies, were much 
inferior to the prefent market price ; fo that pur- 
veyance, befides the llavery of it, was always 
regarded as a great burthen, and being arbitrary, 
and cafual, was liable to great abufes. We may 
fairly prefume, that the hungry courtiers of Eliza- 
beth, fupported by her unlimited power, would be 
fure to render this prerogative very oppreffive to 
the people ; and the commons had laft feihon found 
it neceffary to pafs a bill for regulating thefe ex- 
aftions : But the bill was loft in the houle of peers *. 
The continuance of the abuies begat a new attempt 
for redrefs ; and the fame bill was now revived, and 
again fent up to the houfe of peers, together with a 
bill for fome new regulations in the court of 
exchequer. Soon after the commons received a 

S D'Ewes, p. 4.38. h Strype's Life of Wliitgift, p. 280. 

Neal> vol. i. p. 500. * D'Ewes, p. 434.. 

meffage 



ELIZABETH. 347 

meffage from the upper houfe, defiring them to ap- c n a p. 
point a committee for a conference. At this con- . '^^'tLj 
jference, the peers informed them, that the queen, j^^^^ 
by a mefl'age delivered by lord Burleigh, had ex- 
preffed her difpleafure, that the commons ihould 
prefume to touch on her prerogative. If there 
were any abufes, fhe faid, either in impoling pur-r 
veyance, or in the pra<5lice of the court of exche- 
quer, her majeily was both able and willing to pro- 
vide due reformation ; but v/ould not permit the 
parliament to intermeddle in thefe matters '". The 
-commons, alarmed at this intelligence, appointed 
another committee to attend the queen, and endea- 
vour to fatisfy her of their humble and dutiful in- 
tentions. Elizabeth gave a gracious reception to 
the committee : She expreffed her great inejimable 
loving care towards her loving fubjecls ; which, fhe 
faid, Avas greater than of her own felf, or even than 
any of them could have of themfelves. She told 
them, that fhe had already given orders for an in- 
quiry into the abufes attending purvevance, but the 
dangers of the Spanifli invafion had retarded the 
progrefs of the defign ; that fhe had as much fkiil, 
will, and power to rule her houfehold as any fubjefts 
whatfoever to govern theirs, and needed as little the 
afTiflance of her neighbours ; that the exchequer was 
her chamber, confequently more near to her than 
even her houfehold, and therefore the lefs proper 
for them to intermeddle with ; and that fhe Vv'ould 
of herfelf, with advice of her council and the judges, 
redrefs every grievance in thefe matters, but would 
not permit the commons, by laws moved without 
her privity, to bereave her of the honour attending 
thefe regulations '. The iffue of jhis matter was the 
fame that attended all contefls between Elizabeth 
and her parliaments "". She feems even to have 

^ D'Ewes, p. 440. 1 Ibid. p. 4.14. 

"* Si rixa eji, uii tu ^ulfas, ego -rajfiu'e tantum. JUV. 

been 



348 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, been more imperious in this particular than her pre- 

'^^ LILj decelfors; at lead her more remote ones: For they 

1589. often permitted the abufes of purveyance " to be re- 

dreifed by law ". Edward III. a very arbitrary 

prince, allowed ten feveral flatutes to be enatled 

for that purpofe. 

In fo great awe did the commons ftand of every 
courtier, as well as of the crown, that they durfl 
life no freedom of fpeech which ihey thought would 
give the lead offence to any of them. Sir Edward 
Hobby fliewed in the houfe his extreme grief, that 
by fome great perfonage, not a member of the houfe, 
he had been fharply rebuked for fpeeches delivered 
in parliament : He craved the favour of the houfe, 
and defired that fome of the members might inform 
that great perfonage of his true meaning and inten- 
tion in thele fpeeches p. The commons, to obviate 
thefe inconveniencies, pailed a vote that no one 
iiiQuld reveal the fecrets of the houfe '^. 

The difcomfiture of t^e Armada had begotten in 
the nation a kind of enthufiailic paffion for enter- 
prifes againfl Spain : and nothing feemed now im- 
poflible to be atchieved by the valour and fortune of 
ihe Engliiii. Don Antonio, prior of Crato, a na- 
tural ion of the royal family of Portugal, trufting 
to the averfion of his countrymen againfl the Ca- 
fiilians, had advanced a claim to the crown ; and 
Hying iirfl to' France, thence to England, had been 
encouraged both by Henry and Elizabeth in hh 
rxpedl- pretenfions. A defign was formed by the people, 
■'°'^. not the court of England, to conquer the kingdom 

PoiniT-dl. for don Antonio: Sir Francis Drake and Sir John 
Norris were the leaders in this romantic enterprife : 

" See rote [EE] at the end of ihe volume. " See ihe Statutes 

under the bead of purveyance. r D'Ewes, 9.431,433. 

<; An afl wns paiTed this fclTion, enforcing the funner (tatute, wh'ch 
imjiofed twfiny pounds a nioi.th on eveiy one ahfcrt fiom public 
worfliip; iiu: Uk {>enslty wns iclliiJ\cd to two thirds of the income ot 
tht: leculant. 29 Eliz, cup. 6, 

Near 



ELIZABETH. 34 

Near twenty thoufand volunteers ' enlifted them- chap. 
f'cives in the fiirvice : And fhips v/ere hired, as \vcll , ^^.^J^ 
as arms provided, at the charge of the adventurers. ,51;^. 
The queen's frugality kept her from contributing 
more than fixty thoufend pounds to the expence ; 
and Ihe only allowed fix of her fliips of war to attend 
the expedition \ Tliere was more fpirit and bra- 
very, than forefight or prudence, in the condu*^ of 
this enterprife. The fmall flock of the adventurers 
did not enable them to buy either provifions or am- 
munition fufficient for fuch an undertaking : They 
even wanted veffels to (low the numerous volunteers 
who crowded to them ; and they were obliged to 
feize by force fome fhips of the Hanfe Towns, which 
thev met with at fea : An expedient v/hich fet them 
fomewhat more at eafe in point of room for their 
men, but remedied not the deficiency of their pro- 
vifions \ Had they failed direftly to Portugal, it 
is believed that the good-will of the people, joined 
to the defencelefs (late of the country, might have 
enfured them of fuccefs : But hearing that great pre- 
parations were making at the Groine for the inva- 
(ion of England, they were induced to go thither, 
and deilroy this new armament of Spain. They 
broke into the harbour, burned fome fhips of war, 
particularly one commanded by Recalde, vice-ad- 
miral of Spain; they defeated an army of four or 
five thoufand- men, which was alTembled to oppofe 
them ; they affaulted the Groine, and took the lower 
tovv^n, which they pillaged ; and they would have 
taken the higher, though well fortified, had they not 
found their ammunition and provifions beginning to 
fail them. The young earl of EfTex, a nobleman 
of promifing hopes, fired with the thirfl of military 

" Birsh's Memo'rs of queen Elizshe !i, V'-l. i. p. 6i. Monfon, 
p. 167. (ays, lliat there wtif diilv fourteen tiioiir?.i)ci foldieis and (uut 
tlioufancl i'eamen in the whole on this expedition: KiU tlie account 
contained in Dr. Birch, is given by one of the n^oft coniiderable of the 
adventurers. 

* .Monfon, p. 167. t Ih'd, p. jjg. 

honour, 



350 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

c II A P. honour had fecretly, unknown to the queen, floleit 
^^^^- from England, here joined the adventurers ; and it 



1689. "^3S then agreed by common confent to make fail 
for Portugal, the main objeft of their enterprife. 

Thl; Enghfh landed at Paniche, a fea-port town, 
twelve leagues from Lifbon ; and Norris led the 
army to that capital, while Drake undertook to fail 
up the river, and attack the city with united forces. 
By this time the court of Spain had gotten leifure 
to prepare againfl the invafion. Forces were thrown 
into Lifbon : The Portuguefe were difarmed : All 
fufpefted pcrfons were taken into cuftody : And 
thus, though the inhabitants bore great affeftion to 
don Antonio, none of them durft declare in favour 
of the invaders. The Englifh army, however^ made 
themfelves mailers of the fuburbs, which abounded 
with riches of all kinds ; but as they dehred to con- 
ciliate the affedions of the Portuguefe, and were 
more intent on honour than profit, they obferved a: 
ftrid difciplin^, and abilained from all plunder^ 
Meanwhile they found their ammunition and pro- 
vifion much exhaufted ; they had not a fmgle can- 
non to make a breach in the wails ; the admiral had 
not been able to pafs fome fortrefles which guarded 
the river ; there v/as no appearance of an infurrec- 
tion in their favour 5 ficknefs, from fatigue, hunger, 
and intemperance in wine and fruits, had ieized the 
army : So that it v/as found neceiTary to make all 
pofiible hafte to reimbark. They were not purfued 
by the enemy ; and finding at the mouth of the 
river fixty ihips laden with naval (lores, they feized 
them as lawful prize ; though they belonged to the 
Hanfe Towns, a neutral power. They failed thence 
to Vigo, which they took and burned ; and having 
ravaged the country around, they fet fail and arrived 
in England. Above half of thefe gallant adventurers 
perifhed by ficknefs, famine, fatigue, and thefword"; 

« Biich's Memoirs, Vol. i, p. 6i6 

iiYni 



ELIZABETH. 351 

and England reaped more honour than profit from C 11 A P. 
this extraordinary enterprife. It is computed that v,--,-^ 
eleven hundred gentlemen embarked on board the ,5^5. 
fleet, and that only three hundred and fifty furvived 
thofe multiplied difaflers ''. 

When thefe fhips were on their voyage home- 
wards, they met with the earl of Cumberland, who 
was outward bound, with a fleet of feven fail, all 
equipped at his own charge, except one (hip of war 
which the queen had lent him. That nobleman 
fupplied fir Francis Drake with fome provifions ; a 
generofity which faved the lives of many of Drake's 
men, but for which the others afterwards fuffered 
fcverely. Cumberland failed towards the Terceras, 
and took feveral prizes from the enemy ; but the 
richeft, valued at a hundred thoufand pounds, pe- 
riflied in her return, with >iU her cargo, near St. 
Michael's Mount in Cornwal. Many of thefe ad- 
venturers were killed in a rafn attempt at the Ter- 
ceras ; a great mortahty feized the reil : And it was 
with difficulty that the few hands which remained 
Were able to fteer the lliips back into harbour \ 

Though the fignal advantages gained over the AfH-iiis of 
Spaniards, and the fpirit thence infufed into the Eng- Scotknd. 
lifh, gave Elizabeth great fecurity during the relt 
of her reign, ihe could not forbear keeping an anxi- 
ous eye on Scotland, whofe fituation rendered its 
revolutions always of importance to her. It might 
have been expecled, that this high-fpirited princefs, 
who knew fo well to brave danger, would not have 
retained that maHgnant jealoufy tov/ards her heir, 
with which, during the life-time of Mary, fhe had 
been fo much agitated. James had indeed fucceed- 
cd to all the claims of his mother; bat he had not 
fucceeded to the favour of the catholics, which 

'^ Birch's Memoirs, vol. i. p. 6i. "> Moufoii, !'• i6j. 

7 could 



3^-2 HISTORY OF ENGLAND, 

CHAP, could alone render thefe claims dangerous^: An3 
^~~^ as the queen was now well advanced in years, and 
,^g^. enjoyed an uncontrolled authority over her fubjefts, 
it was not likely that the king of Scots, who was 
of an indolent unambitious temper, would ever give 
her any diflurbance in her pofl'eflion of the throne. 
Yet all thefe circumllances could not remove her 
timorous fulpicions : And fo far from fatisfying the 
nation by a fettlement of the fuccellion, or a decla- 
ration of James's title, flie was as anxious to pre- 
vent every incident which might anywife raife his 
credit, or procure him the rt-gard of the Englifh, 
as if he had been her immediace rival and compe- 
titor. Molt of his minifters and favourites were 
I her penfioners ; and as Ihe was defirous to hinder 

him from marrying and having children, ihe ob- 
liged them to throv/ obllacles in the way of every 
alliance, even the moil reafonable, which could be 
offered him ; and during fome years fhe fucceeded 
in this malignant policy \ He had fixed on the 
elder daughter of the king of Denmark, who being 
a remote prince and not powerful, could give her no 
umbrage ; yet did fhe fo artfully crofs this negotia- 
tion, that the Danifh monarch, impatient of delay, 
married his daughter to the duke of Brunfwick. 
James then renev^^ed his fuit to the younger prin- 
cefs ; and ftill found obftacles from the intrigues of 
Elizabeth, who, merely with a viev/ of interpofmg 
delay, propofed to him the filler of the king of 
Navarre, a princefs much older than himfelf, and 
entirely dellitute of fortune. The young king, 
befides the defire of fecuring himfelf by the pro- 
fpe<5l of iifue, from thofe traiterous attempts, too 
frequent among his fubjecls, had been fo watched 
by the rigid aufterity of the ecclefiallics, that he 
had another inducement to marry, which is not fo 

» Wiiiwooc^, vol. i. p. 41. '*' Melvi!, p. j66. 177. 

ufual 



is^' 



ELIZABETH.' ^si 

iifual with monarchs. His Impatience therefore chap. 
broke through all the politics of Elizabeth : The . ^'^^ 
articles of marriage were fettled: The ceremony ' 
was performed by proxy : And the princefs em- 
barked for Scotland; but was driven by a florni 
into a port of Norway. This temped, and fome 
others which happened near the fame time, were 
univerfally believed in S'cotland and Denmark to 
have proceeded from a combination of the Scottifh 
and Danifli witches ; and the dying confeffion of the 
criminals was fuppofed to put the accufation beyond 
all controverfy ^ James, hovi^ever, though a great 
believer In forcery, was not deterred by this inci- 
dent from taking a voyage in order to condud his 
bride home : He arrived In Norway ; carried the 
queen thence to Copenhagen; and having paffed 
the winter in that city, he brought her next fprino- 
to Scotland, where they were joyfully received by 
the people. The clergy alone, who never neglefted 
an opportunity of vexing their prince, made oppo- 
fition to the queen's coronation, on account of the 
ceremony of anointing her, v/hich they alleged was 
either a JewiHi or a popilh rite ; and therefore ut- 
terly antichrillian and unlawful. But James was as 
much bent on the ceremony as they were averfe to 
it ; and after much controverfy, and many intrigues, 
his authority, which had not often happened, at laft 
prevailed over their oppofition \ 

^ MeJvil, J). I So. c Spotrwood, p. 3«i. 



Vol. V. A a 



354. HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 



CHAP. XLIII. 

French affairs Murder of the duke of Guife < «• ■■ 

Murder of Henry III. — »» Progrefs of Henry IV, 
,-,;— — Naval enterprifes againft Spain A par- 
liament Henry IV. embraces the catholic reli- 
gion Scotch affairs Naval enterprifes 

A parliament Peace of Vervins The earl 

of Effex, 

CHAP. A FTER a ftate of great anxiety and many 
^J^f^^J;^ XjL difficulties, Elizabeth had at length reached a 
1590, fituation where, though her affairs ftill required at- 
tention, and found employment for her adlive fpirit, 
Ihe was removed from all danger of any immediate 
revolution, and might regard the efforts of her ene- 
mies with fome degree of confidence and fecurity. 
Her fuccefsful and prudent adminiilration had 
gained her, together with- the admiration of 
foreigners, the affedions of her own fubjefts ; and 
after the death of the queen of Scots, even the 
catholics, however difcontented, pretended not to 
difpute her title, or adhere to any other perfon as her 
competitor. James, curbed by his faftious nobility 
and ecclefiaftics, poff^^ffed at home very little au- 
thority ; and was folicitous to remain on good terms 
with Elizabeth and the Englilh nation, in hopes 
that tim.e, aided by his patient tranquillity, would 
fecure him that rich fucceflion to which his birth 
entitled him. The Hollanders, though over- 
matched in their contefl with Spain, llill made an 
obftinate refiftance ; and fuch was their unconquer- 
able antipathy to their old mailers, and fuch the 
prudent condud of young Maurice, their governor, 

.. tJiat 



ELIZABETH. 355 

that the fubditing of that fmall territory, if at all chap. 
poffible, mufl be the work of years, and the refult "^^^iiv. 
of many and great fucceffes. Philip, who, in his jcoo. 
powerful effort againft England, had been tranf- 
ported by refentment and ambition beyond his ufual 
cautious maxims, was now difabled, and fliil more 
difcouraged, from adventuring again on fucli ha- 
zardous enterprifes. The fituation alfo of affairs 
in France began chiefly to employ his attention ; 
but notwithftanding all his artifice, and force, and 
expence, the events in that kingdom proved every 
day more contrary to his expectations, and more 
favourable to the friends and confederates of Eng- 
land. « 

The violence of the league having conftrained French 
Henry to declare war againft the Hugonots, thefe ^^^"^* 
religionifts feemed expoled to the utmofl danger ; 
and EHzabeth, fenfible of the intimate connection 
between her own interefts and thofe of that party, 
had fupported the king of Navarre hj her nego- 
tiations in Germany, and by large fums of money, 
which fhe remitted for levying forces in that coun- 
try. This great prince, not difcouraged by the 
fuperiority of his enemies, took the field ; and in 
the year 1587 gained at Coutras, a complete vic- 
tory over the army of the French king ; but as hi§ 
allies, the Germans, were at the fame time dif- 
comfited by the army of the league, under the duke 
of Guife, his fituation, notwithftanding his victory, 
feemed ftill as defperate as ever. The chief ad- 
vantage which he reaped by this diverfity of fuccefs 
arofe from the diffenfions which by that means took 
place among his enemies. The inhabitants of Paris, 
intoxicated with admiration of Guife, and ftrongly 
prejudiced againft their king, whofe intentions had 
become fufpicious to them, took to arms, and 
obliged Henry to fly for his fafety. That prince, 
diifembling his refentment, entered into a nep^o- 
tiation with the league ; and haviag conferred 
A a 2 many 



^5^ 



History of England. 



Murder of 
the duke 
of Guile. 



CHAP, many high offices on Guife and his partifans, fum- 
^^^f^J^j moned an afiembly of the flates at Blois, on pre- 
J550. tence of finding expedients to fupport the intended 
war agalnft the Hugonots. The various fcenes of 
perfidy and crueky, which had been exhibited in 
France, had juftly begotten a mutual diffidence 
among all parties ; yet Guife, trufling more to the 
timidity than honour of the king, rafhiy put him- 
felf into the hands of that monarch, and expefted, 
by the afcendant of his own genius, to make him 
f-bmit to all his exorbitant pretenfions. Henry, 
though of an eafy difpofition, not fleady to his re- 
folutions, or even to his promifes, wanted neither 
courage nor capacity ; and finding all his fubtilties 
eluded by the vigour of Guife, and even his throne 
expofed to the mod imminent danger, he embraced 
more violent counfels than were natural to him, and 
ordered that prince and his brother, the cardinal of 
Guife, to be all'affinated in his palace. 

This cruel execution, which the neceffity of it 
alone could excufe, had nearly proved fatal to the 
author, and feemed at firfl to plunge him into 
greater dangers than thofe which he fought to avoid, 
by taking vengeance on his enemy. The partifans 
of the league were inflamed with the utmofl rage 
againfl him : The populace every where, particularly 
at Paris, renounced allegiance to him : The eccle- 
fiallics and the preachers filled all places with exe- 
crations againft his name : And the moft powerful 
cities, and moft opulent provinces, appeared to 
combine in a refolution, either of renouncing mo- 
narchy, or of changing their monarch. Henry, 
finding flender refources among his catholic fubjefts, 
was conftrained to enter into a confederacy with the 
Hugonots and the king of Navarre : He enlifted 
large bodies of Swifs infantry and German cavalry : 
And being ftill fupported by his chief nobility, he 
aifembled by ail thefe means an army of near forty 
thouiand men, and advanced to the gates of Paris, 

10 ready 



E L I Z A B E T II. 



357 



ready to crufli the league, and fubdue all his ene- chap. 
mies. The defperate refolution of one man divert- '^^^jiv. 
ed the courfe of thefe great events. Jaques Cle- j^^o, 
ment, a Dominican friar, inflamed by that bloody 
fpirit of bigotry which diftinguiflies this century, 
and a great part of the following, beyond all ages 
of the world, embraced the refolution of facrificing 
his own life, in order to fave the church from the 
perfecutions of a heretical tyrant ; and, being ad- Mmder of 
mitted, under fome pretext, to the king's prefence, ^'^"P ^'^"^ 
he gave that prince a mortal wound, and was im- 
mediately put to death by the courtiers, who haftily 
revenged the murder of their fovereign. This me- 
morable incident happened on the firft of Augufl 
1589. 

' The king of Navarre, next heir to the crown, 
aflumed the government by the title of Henry IV. 
but fucceeded to much greater difficulties than thofe 
which furrounded his predecellbr. The prejudices 
entertained againft his religion, made a great part 
of the nobility immediately defert him ; and it was 
only by his promife of hearkening to conferences and 
inftruQiion, that he could engage any of the catholics 
to adhere to his undoubted title. The league, go- 
verned by the duke of Mayenne, brother to Guife, 
gathered new force, and the king of Spain enter- 
tained views, either of difmembering the French 
monarchy, or of annexing the whole to his own 
dominions. In thefe diftrefsful circumftances Hen- 
ry addreifed himfelf to Elizabeth, and found her 
well difpofed to contribute to his affillance, and to 
oppofe the progrefs of the catholic league, and of 
Philip, her inveterate and dangerous enemies. To 
prevent the defertion of his Swifs and German 
auxiliaries, llie made him a prefent of twenty-two 
thoufand pounds, a greater fum than, as he de- 
clared, he had ever feen before : And Ihe fent him 
a reinforcement of four thoufand men, under lord 
Willoughby, an officer of reputation, who joined 
A^ ^ the 



353 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

C HAP. the French at Dieppe. Strengthened by thefe fup- 
^^^^ILi P^i^^j Henry marched direftly to Paris ; and having 
,590. taken the fuburbs fword in hand, he abandoned 
them to be pillaged by his foldiers. He employed 
this body of Engliih in many other enterprifes ', and 
flill found reafon to praife their courage and fidelity. 
The time of their fervice being elapied, he difmifled 
them with many high commendations. Sir William 
Drury, fir Thomas Balkerville, and fir John Bo- 
roughs, acquired reputation this campaign, and re- 
vived in France the ancient fam^e of Englifii va- 
lour. 
Progrefsof The army, which Henry next campaign led into 
founh ^^^ ^^^ field, was much inferior to that of the league ; 
but as it was compofed of the chief nobility of 
France, he feared not to encounter his enemies in 
a pitched battle at Yvree, and he gained a complete 
victory over them. This fuccefs enabled him to 
blockade Paris, and he reduced that capital to the 
lall extremity of famine : When the duke of Par- 
ma, in confequence of orders from Philip, marched 
to the relief of the league, and obliged Henry to raife 
the blockade. Having performed this important 
fervice, he retreated to the Low Countries ; and, by 
his confummate Ikill in the art of war, performed 
thefe long marches in the face of the enemy, with* 
out affording the French monarch that opportunity 
which he fought, of giving him battle, or fo much 
as once putting his army in diforder. The only 
lofs which he fuflained was in the Low Countries ; 
where prince Maurice took advantage of his ab- 
fence, and recovered fome places which the duke of 
Parma had formerly conquered from the States **. 
, The fituation of Henry's affairs, though pro- 
mifing, was not fo well advanced or eltablifhed as 
to make the queen difcontinue her fuccours ; and 
{he was flill more confiimed in the refolution of 

<^ See note ^PF] Jit the end of the voliirne, 

5 fupporting 



S59I- 



ELIZABETH. 359 

fupporting him by fome advantages gained by the chap. 
king of Spain. The duke of Mercoeur, governor x^-m- 
of Britanny, a prince of the honfe of Lorraine, ha4 ,5^,. 
declared for the league ; and finding himfelf hard 
prefled by Henry's forces, he had been obliged, in 
order to fecure himfelf, to introduce fome Spanifh 
troops into the fea-port towns of that province. 
Elizabeth was alarmed at the danger ; and forefaw 
that the Spaniards, befides infefting the Englifh 
commerce by privateers, might employ thefe hafr 
hours as the fear of their naval preparations, and 
might more eafily from that vicinity, than from 
Spain or Portugal, projeft an invafion of England. 
She concluded, therefore, a new treaty with Henry, 
in which llie engaged to fend over three thoufand 
men, to be employed in the redudion of Britanny, 
and (lie ftipulated that her charges fhouid, in a 
twelvemonth, or as foon as the enemy was expelled, 
be refunded her ^ Thefe forces were commanded 
by fir John Norris, and under him by his brother 
Henry, and by Anthony Shirley. Sir Roger Wil- 
liams was at the head of a fmall body which garri- 
foned Dieppe : And a fquadron of fhips, under the 
command of fir Henry Palmer, lay upon the coafl 
of France, and intercepted all the velTels belonging 
to the Spaniards or the leaguers. 

The operations of war can very little be regu- 
lated beforehand by any treaty or agreement-; and 
Henry, who found it necellary to lay afide the pro- 
je£led enterprife againfl Britanny, perfuaded the 
Englifh commanders to join his army, and to take 
a fhare in the hoflilities which he carried into Pi- 
cardy^ Notwithftanding the difgufl which Eliza- 
beth received from this difappointment, he laid be- 
fore her a plan for expelling the leaguers from Nor- 
mandy, and perfuaded her to fend over a new body 
of four thoufand men to aiTift him in that enter- 

« Camden, p. 561. '' Rymer, torn, xiv. p. 116. 

A a 4 prife. 



3^o HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, prlfe. The earl of Efiex was appointed general of 
^^^^II; thefe forces ; a young nobleman, who, by many 
, „,, exterior accomplilhments, and ftill more real merit, 
was daily advancing in favour with Elizabeth, and 
feemed to occupy that place in her affections which 
Leicefter, now deceafed, had fo long enjoyed. Eflex, 
impatient for military fame, was extremely uneafy 
to lie Ipme time at Dieppe unemployed ; and had 
- not the orders which he received from his miflrefe 
been fo pofitive, he would gladly have accepted of 
Henry's invitation, and have marched to join the 
French army now in Champagne. This plan of 
operations was alfo propofed to Elizabeth by the 
French ambaffador, but fhe rejefted it with great 
difpleafure ; and Ihe threatened immediately to re- 
call her troops, if Henry fhould perfevere any longer 
in his prefent practice, of breaking all concert with 
her, and attending to nothing but his own interefts ^. 
Urged by thefe motives, the French king at laft led 
his army into Normandy, and laid fiege to Roiien, 
which he reduced to great difficulties. But the 
league, unable of themfelves to take the field againft 
him, had again recourfe to the duke of Parma, who 
received orders to march to their relief. He exe- 
cuted this enterprife with his ufual abilities and fuc- 
cefs ; and, for the prefent, fruftrated all the projects 
of Henry and Elizabeth. This princefs, who kept 
flill in view the interefts of her own kingdom in all 
her foreign tranfadtions, was impatient under thefe 
difappointments, blamed Henry for his negligence 
in the execution of treaties, and complained that the 
Englifli forces were thrufl foremoft in every hazard- 
ous enterprife *". It is probable, however, that their 
own ardent courage, and their defire of diflinguifh- 
ing themfelves hi fo celebrated a theatre of war, 
were the caufes why they fo often enjoyed this pe- 
rilous honour. 

t Birch's Negotiations, p. 5. Rymcr, torn, xiv, p. Jaj. i+o. 
*• Camden, ^. j6i. 

NoTWITfil 



ELIZABETH. 351 

Notwithstanding the indifFerent fuc<jefs of c h a p. 
former enterprifes, the queen was fenfible how ne- XLiri. 
ceflary it was to fupport Henry againfl the league ^^^7/ 
and the Spaniards ; and Ihe formed a new treaty 
with him, in which they agreed never to make peace 
with Philip but by common confent ; Jhe promifed 
to fend him a new fupply of four thoufand men ; 
and he flipulated to repay her charges in a twelve- 
month, to employ thefe forces, joined to a body of 
French troops, in an expedition againft Britanny, 
and to confign into her hands a fea-port town of 
that province, for a retreat to the Englifh '. Henry 
knew the impoffibility of executing Ibme of thefe 
articles, and the imprudence of fulfilling others ; but 
finding them rigidly infilled on by Elizabeth, he 
accepted of her fuccours, and trufted that he might 
eafily, on fome pretence, be able to excufe his 
failure in executing his part of the treaty. This 
campaign vi^as the leaft fuccefsful of all thofe which 
he had yet carried on againft the league. 

During thefe military operations in France, Naval en- 
Elizabeth employed her naval power againft Philip, '^•"piifes 
and endeavoured to intercept his Weft Indian trea- spa'nl 
fures, the fource of that greatnefs which rendered 
him fo formidable to all his neighbours. She fent 
a fquadron of feven fliips, under the command of 
lord Thomas Howard, for this fervice ; but the king 
of Spain, informed of her purpofe, fitted out a great 
force of fifty-five fail, and difpatched them to efcort 
the Indian fleet. They fell in with the Englifh 
fquadron ; and, by the courageous obftinacy of fir 
Richard Grenville, the vice-admiral, who refufed to 
make his efcape by flight, they took one veflTel, the 
firft Englifh fhip of war that had yet fallen into 
the hands of the Spaniards ^. The reft of the 
fquadron returned fafely into England j fruftrated 

* Rj'mer, vol. xvi. p. 151, 168, 17J. 173, 
fe See note [GG] at the end of the volume. 

of 



3^2 HISTORY GF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, of their expe(!!lations, but pleafing themfelves with 
^^^;\^" the idea that their attempt had not been altogether 
' ,^j,,_ fruitlefs in hurting the enemy. The Indian fleet 
had been fo long detained in the Havanna from the 
fear of the Enghih, that they were obliged at laft to 
fet fail in an improper feafon, and molt of them pe- 
rilhed by fliipwreck ere they reached the Spanifh 
harbours '. The earl of Cumberland made a like 
unfuccefsful enterprife againft the Spaniih trade. 
He carried out one (hip of the queen's, and feven 
others equipped at his own expence ; but the prizes 
which he made did not compenfate the charges "*. 

'The fpirit of thefe expenfive and hazardous ad- 
ventures was very prevalent in England. Sir Wal- 
ter Raleigh, who had enjoyed great favour with 
the queen, finding his intereft to decline, deter- 
mined to recover her good graces by fome important 
undertaking.; and as his reputation was high among 
his countrymen, he perl'uaded great numbers to en- 
gage with him as volunteers in an attempt on the 
^i5*- Weil Indies. The fleet was detained fo long in the 
Channel by contrary winds, that the feafon was loft : 
Raleigh was recalled by the queen : Sir Martin 
Frobifher fucceeded to the command, and made a 
privateering voyage againft the Spaniards. He 
took one rich carrack near the ifland of Flores, and 
deftroyed another ". About the fame time Thomas 
White, a Londoner, took two Spanifli fhips, 
which, befides fourteen hundred cheits of quick- 
filver, contained about two millions of bulls for 
indulgences ; a commodity ufelefs to the Englifti, 
but which had coft the king of Spain three hun- 
dred thoufand florins, and would have been fold by 
him in the Indies for five millions. 

This war did great damage to Spain ; but it was 
attended with confiderable expence to England j 

' Monfon, y. 163. «" Ibid, p, 169. 

» Ibid, p. 165. Camden, p. 569. 

and 



ELIZABETH. 3<j3 

and Elizabeth's minifters computed, that fince the c h a p. 
commencement of it, fhe had fpent in Flanders and ^^i^'- 
France, and on her naval expeditions, above one ^"^^^C/' 
million two hundred thoufand pounds"; a charge 
which, notwithftaiiding her extreme frugality, was 
too burdenfome for her narrow revenues to fupport. 
She fummoned therefore a parliament in order to 1593. 
obtain fupply : But fhe either thought her authority ^^^* *?• 
fo eftablifhed that flie needed to make them no menu'*' 
conceilions in return, or fhe rated her power and 
prerogative above money : For there never was any 
parliament whom fhe treated in a more haughty 
manner^ whom fhe made more fenfible of their own 
weaknefs, or whofe privileges fhe more openly vio- 
lated. When the fpeaker, fir Edward Coke, made 
the three ufual requefts, of freedom from arrefts, 
of accefs to her perfon, and of liberty of fpeech, 
ihe replied to him by the mouth of Puckering, lord 
keeper, that liberty of fpeech was granted to the 
commons, but they muft know what liberty they 
were entitled to ; not a liberty for every one to fpeak 
what he lifteth, or what cometh in his brain to 
utter; their privilege extended no farther than a 
liberty of Aye or No : That fhe enjoined the fpeaker, 
if he perceived any idle heads fo negligent of their 
own fafety as to attempt reforming the church, or 
innovating in the commonwealth, that he fhould re- 
fufe the bills exhibited for that purpofe, till they were 
examined by fuch as were fitter to confider of thefe 
things, and could better judge of them : That fhe 
would not impeach the freedom of their perfons ; 
but they mufh beware left, under colour of this pri- 
vilege, they imagined that any negled: of their duty 
could be covered or protected : And that flie would 
jiot refufe them accefs, to her perfon, provided it 
were upon urgent and weighty caufes, and at times 

Strype, vol, i!i. 

convenient. 



-<"Ci-^ 



^64 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

G H A P. convenient, and when (he might have leifure from 
XLlir. other important affairs of the realm p. 
J , Notwithstanding the menacing and con- 

temptuous air of this fpeech, the intrepid and inde- 
fatigable Peter Wentworth, not difcouraged by his 
former ill fuccefs, ventured to tranfgrefs the imperial 
orders of Elizabeth. He prefented to the lord 
keeper a petition, in which he defired the upper 
houfe to join with the lower in a fupplication to her 
majefty for entailing the fucceffion of the crown ; 
and he declared that he had a bill ready prepared for 
that purpofe. This method of proceeding was fuf- 
ficiently refpectful and cautious ; but the fubje£t 
was always extremely difagreeable to the queen, and 
what fhe had exprefsly prohibited any one from 
meddling with : She fent Wentworth immediately to 
the Tov/er ; committed fir Thomas Bromley, who 
had feconded him, to the Fleet prifon, together with 
Stevens and Welfh, two members to whom fir 
Thomas had communicated his intention ''. About 
a fortnight after, a motion was made in the houfe, to 
petition the queen for the releafe of thefe members ; 
but it was anfwered by all the privy-counfellors 
there prefent, that her majefty had committed them 
for caufes befl known to herfelf, and that to prefs 
her on that head would only tend to the prejudice 
of the gentlemen whom they meant to ferve : She 
would releafe them whenever fhe thought proper, 
and would be better pleafed to do it of her own 
proper motion, than from their fuggeflion'. The 
houfe willingly acquiefced in this reafoning. 

So arbitrary an aO:, at the commencement of the 
fefTion, might well reprefs all farther attempts for 
freedom : But the religious zeal of the puritans was 
not fo eafily reftrained ; and it infpired a courage 
which no human motive was able to furmount, 

P D'Ewes, p. 460. 4.69. Townfend, p. 37. 

^ D'Ewes, p. 4.70, Xownfend, p. 54., ' D'Ewes, p. 497. 

Morrice, 



ELIZABETH. 2^$ 

Morrice, chancellor of the dutchy, and attorney of c hap. 
the court of wards, made a motion for redrelllng the '^^'^J;}\ 
abufes in the biihops* courts, but above all, in the ,^^3, 
high commiflion ; where fubfcriptions, he faid, were 
exaded to articles at the pleafure of the prelates ; 
where oaths were impofed, obliging perfons to an- 
fwer to all queftions without diftinftion, even though 
they fhould tend to their own condemnation ; and 
where every one who refufed entire fatisfadion to 
the commiffioners was imprifoned, without relief or 
remedy '. This motion was feconded by fome 
members ; but the minifters and privy-counfeilors 
oppofed it, and foretold the confequences which 
enfued. The queen fent for the fpeaker, and after 
requiring him to deliver to her Morrice's bill, fhe 
told him that it v^'^as in her power to call parlia- 
ments, in her power to difibive them, in her power 
to give alTent or diffent to any determination which 
they fhould form : That her purpofe in fummoning 
this parliament was twofold, to have laws enacted 
for the farther enforcement of uniformity in religion, 
and to provide |or the defence of the nation againft 
the exorbitant power of Spain : That thefe two 
points ought, therefore, to be the object of their 
deliberations : She had enjoined them already, by 
the mouth of the lord keeper, to meddle neither 
with matters of date nor religion ; and flie wondered 
how any one could be fo aifuming as to attempt a 
fubjedl fo exprefsly contrary to her prohibition: 
That fhe was highly offended with this prefumption ; 
and took the prefent opportunity to reiterate the 
commands given by the keeper, and to require that 
nQ bill, regarding either flate afiairs, or reforma- 
tion in caufes ecclefiaflical, be exhibited in the 
houfe : And that, in particular, fhe charged the 
fpeaker upon his allegiance, if any fuch bills were 

« D'Ewes, p. 4.74. Townftfnd, p, 6o» 

, offered, 



365 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, offered, abfolutely to refufe them a reading, and 
XLiii. jjQ|. j-Q ii-^uch as permit them to be deba.ted by the 
,^„, members \ This command from the queen was 
fubmitted to without farther queftion. Morrice was 
feized in the houie itfelf by a ferjeant at arms, dif- 
charged from his office of chancellor of the dutchy, 
incapacitated from any pradice in his profeffion as 
a common lawyer, and kept fome years prifoner in 
Tilbury caftle ". 

The queen having thus exprefsly pointed out both 
what the houfe fhould and fliould not do, the com- 
mons were as obfequious to the one as to the other 
of her injunftions. They paffed a law againil re- 
cufants ; fuch a law as was fuited to the fevere cha- 
racter of Elizabeth, and to the perfecuting fpirit of 
the age. It was intituled, yln ad to retain her ma- 
jejifs Juhje6ls in their due obedience ; and was meant, 
as the preamble declares, to obviate fuch inconve- 
niences and perils as might grow from the wicked 
praftices of feditious feftaries and difloyal perfons : 
For thefe two fpecies of criminals were always, at 
that time, confounded together, as equally danger- 
ous to the peace of fociety. It was enacted, that 
any perfon above fixteen years of age, who obili- 
nately refufed during the fpace of a month to attend 
public worfhip, Ihould be committed to prifon ; 
that if after being condemned for this otfence, he 
perfift three months in his refufal, he mud abjure 
the realm ; and that if he either refufe this condi- 
tion, or return after banifimient, he fliould fuft'er 
capitally as a felon without benefit of clergy". This 
law bore equally hard upon the puritans and upon 
the catholics ; and, had it not been impofed by the 
queen's authority, was certainly, in that refpeft, 
much contrary to the private fentiments and inclr- 
nations of the majority in the houfe of commons. 

t D'Ewes, p. 4.74. 4.78. Townfend, p. 68. " Heylin's 

^iflory of the Preftyteiians, p. 310. " 35 Elir. c. i. 

Very 



1591' 



ELIZABETH. 3^7 

Very little oppofition, however, appears there to c 11 A p. 
have been openly made to it ^ . XLill. 

The expences of the war with Spain having re- 
duced the queen to great difficulties, the grant of 
fubfidies feems to have been the mod important bu- 
fmefs of this parliament ; and it was a fignal proof 
of the high fpirit of Elizabeth that, while confcious 
of a prefent dependence on the Commons, Ihe opened 
the feffion with the mofl haughty treatment of them, 
and covered her weaknefs under fuch a lofty ap- 
pearance of fuperiority. The commons readily 
voted two fubfidies and four fifteenths ; but this 
fum not appearing fufficient to the court, an un- 
ufual expedient was fallen upon to induce them to 
make an enlargement in their conceffions. The 
peers informed the commons in a conference, that 
they could not give their confent to the fupply voted, 
thinking it too fmall for the queen's occafions : 
They therefore propofed a grant of three fubfidies 
and fix fifteenths ; and defired a farther conference 
in order to perfuade the commons to agree to this 
meafure. The commons, who had acquired the 
privilege of beginning bills of fubfidy, took offence 
at this procedure of the lords, and at firfl abfolutely 
rejefted the propofal : But being afraid, on reflec- 
tion, that they had by this refufal given offence to 
their fuperiors, they both agreed to the conference, 
and afterwards voted the additional fubfidy "". 

The queen, notwithflanding this unufual con- 
ceflion of the commons, ended the feflion with a 
fpeech, containing fome reprimands to them, and 
full of the fame high pretenfions which flie had af- 
fumed at the opening of the parliament. She took 
notice, by the mouth of the keeper, that certain 
members fpent more time than was neceffary, by in- 

y After enabling this ftatute, the clergy, in order to remove the 
odium from thei7)felves, often took care that recufants fhoiild be tried 
by the civil jiuiges at the affizes, rather than by the ecclefiaftical com- 
mifljoners. Strype's Ann. vol. iv. p. 264.. 

i> D'Ewes, p. 485. 4.87, 4.88, Tovyiiiend, p. 66. 

dulging 



»593« 



368 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, dulging themfelves in harangues and reafonings : 
'^}1Li -^^^^ ^^ exprefled her difpleafure on account of 
their not paying due reverence to privy-counfellors, 
" who," {he told them, " were not to be accounted 
'' as common knights and burgefles of the houfe, 
*' who are counfellors but during the parhament : 
',' Whereas the others are (landing counfellors, and 
" for their wifdom and great fervice are called to 
" the council of the ftate ^.'* The queen alfo, in her 
own perfon, made the parhament a fpirited harangue ; 
in which flie fpoke of the juftice and moderation of 
her government, exprefled the fmall ambition fhe 
had ever entertained of making conquefts, difplayed 
the juft grounds of her quarrel with the king of 
Spain, and difcovered how little fhe apprehended 
the power of that monarch, even though he fhould 
make a greater effort againft her than that of his In- 
vincible Armada. " But 1 am informed,'* added 
fhe, " that v/hen he attempted this lafl invafion, 
" fome upon the fea-coaft forfook their towns, fled 
*' up higher into the country, and left all naked and 
" expofed to his entrance : But I fwear unto you, 
*' by God, if I knew thofe perfons, or may know 
*' of any that fhall do fo hereafter, I will make 
*' them feel what it is to be fearful in fo urgent a 
" caufe ''.'* By this menace, fhe probably gave the 
people to underfland, that fhe would execute mar- 
tial law upon fuch cowards : For there was no fla- 
tute by which a man could be puniflied for changing 
his place of abode. 

The king of France, though he had hitherto 
made war on the league with great bravery and re- 
putation, though he had this campaign gained con- 
fiderable advantages over them, and though he was 
afTifted by a confiderable body of Englifh under 
Norris, who carried hoftilities into the heart of Bri- 



a D'Ewes, p. 466. Townfend, p. 47. 
*> D'Ewes, p. 466, Townfend, p. ^i. 



tanny^ 



159; 



ELIZABETH. ^^9 

tariny, was become fenfible that he nevel* could by chap. 
force of arms alone render himfelf mafter of his . ^^^^^• 
kingdom. The nearer he feemed by his military 
fuccefles to approach to a full poflfeflion of the throne, 
the more difcontent and jealoufy arofe among thofe 
Romanifts who adhered to him ; and a party was 
formed in his own court to ele<5t fome catholic mo- 
narch of the royal blood, if Henry fhould any longer 
refufe to fatisfy them by declaring his converfion. 
This excellent prince was far from being a bigot to 
his feft ; and as he deemed thefe theological difputes 
entirely fubordinate to the pubhc good, he had fe- 
fcretly determined from the beginning, to come 
fome time or other to the refolution required of him» 
He had found on the death of his predeceflbr, that 
the hugonots, who formed the braveft and mofl 
faithful part of his army, were fuch determined 
zealots, that if he had at that time abjured their 
faith, they would injflantly have abandoned him to 
the pretenfions and ufurpations of the catholics. 
The more bigoted catholics, he knew, particularly 
thofe of the league, had entertained fuch an unfur- 
mountable prejudice againfl his perfon, and diffi- 
dence of his fmcerity, that even his abjuration would 
not reconcile them to his title ; and he muft either 
expeft to be entirely excluded from the throne, or 
be admitted to it on fuch terms as would leave him 
little more than the mere fhadov/ of royalty. Ill 
this delicate fituation he had refolved to temporife ; 
to retain the hugonots by continuing in the profef- 
fion of their religion ; to gain the moderate catholics 
by giving them hopes of his converfion ; to attach 
both to his perfon by conduct and fuccefs ; and he 
hoped either that the animofity arifing from war 
againft the league, would make them drop gradually 
the queftion of religion, or that he might in time, 
after fome viftories over his enemies and fome con- 
ferences with divines, make finally, with more de- 
cency and dignity, that abjuration, which muft have 
Vol. V. B b appeared 



370 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, appeared at fir 11 mean as well as fufpicious to both 
,^^;i^t^ parties. 

J ^(,3 When the people are attached to any theological 

Henry IV. tenets, merely from a general perfuafion or prepof- 
^he caUio- ^sffion, they are eafily induced by any motive or 
lie reii- authority to change their faith in thefe myflerious 
gion. fubjefts ; as appears from the example of the Eng- 
Hfh, vvho, during fome reigns, ufually embraced, 
without fcruple, the ftill varying religion of their 
fovereigns. But the French nation, where princi- 
ples had fo long been difplayed as the badges of fac- 
tion, and where each party had fortified its belief by 
an animofity againfl the other, were not found fo 
pliable or inconftant ; and Henry was at lafl con- 
vinced, that the catholics of his party would entirely 
abandon him, if he gave them not immediate fatif- 
fadtion in this particular. The hugonots alfo, taught 
by experience, clearly faw that his defertion of them 
was become abfolutely neceffary for the public let- 
tlement ; and fo general was this perfuafion among 
I hem, that, as the duke of Sully pretends, even the 
divines of that party purpofely allowed themfelves to 
be worfted in the difputes and conferences ; that the 
king might more readily be convinced of the weak- 
nefs of their caufe, and might more cordially and 
fincerely, at leaft more decently, embrace the reli- 
gion which it was fo much his intereft to believe. 
If this feif-denial in fo tender a point fhould appear 
incredible and fupernatural in theologians, it will at 
leaft be thought very natural, that a prince fo little 
inftruded in thefe matters as Henry, and defirous to 
preferve his fmcerity, fhould infenfibly bend his opi- 
nion to the necefTity of his affairs, and fhould believe 
that party to have the befh arguments who could 
alone put him in poffeilion of a kingdom. All cir- 
cumftances, therefore, being prepared for this great 
event, that monarch renounced the proteflant reli- 
gion, and was folemnly received by the French pre- 
lates of his party, into the bofom of the church. 

2 ELIZABJiTH, 



ELIZABETH. 371 

Elizabeth, who was herfelf attached to the pro- chap. 
teftants, chiefly by her interefts and the circuniflances y^^^^^^l^ 
of her birth, and who feems to have entertained jy^j. ' 
fome propenfity during her whole Hfe to the catholic 
fuperftition, at leaft to the ancient ceremonies, yet 
pretended to be extremely difpleafed with this abju- 
ration of Henry ; and flie wrote him an angry letter^ 
reproaching him with this interefted change, of his 
religion. Senfible, however, that the league and 
the king of Spain were ftill their common enemies, 
(lie hearkened to his apologies ; continued her fuc- 
cours both of men and money ; and formed a new 
treaty, in which they mutually ftipulated never to 
make peace but by common agreement. 

The intrigues of Spain were not limited to Scotch 
France and England : By means of the never-failing ^"^'"» 
pretence of religion, joined to the influence of mo- 
ney, Philip excited new diforders in Scotland, and 
gave frefli alarms to Elizabeth. George Ker, bro- 
ther to lord Newbottle, had been taken, while he 
was paffing fecretly into Spain ; and papers were 
found about him, by which a dangerous confpiracy 
of fome catholic noblemen with Philip was difco- 
vered. The earls of Angus, Errol, and Huntley, 
the heads of three potent families, had entered into 
a confederacy with the Spanifh monarch : And had 
ftipulated to raife all their forces ; to join them to a 
body of Spanifli troops, which Phihp promifed to 
fend into Scotland ; and after re-eftablifhing the ca- 
tholic religion in that kingdom, to march with their 
united power in order to eft'eft the fame purpofe in 
England \ Graham of Fintry, who had alfo en- 
tered into this confpiracy, was taken, and arraigned, 
and executed. Elizabeth fent lord Borough ambafla- 
dor into Scotland, and exhorted the king to exercife 
the fame feverity on the three earls, to confifcate 
their eltates, and by annexing them to the crown, 

^ Spotfwood, p. 39T. Rymer, torn, xvi, p. 190, 

B b 2 both 



1593. 



372 HISTORY OF ENGLANI>. 

CHAP, both increafe his own demefnes, and fet an example' 
XLiii. j^ ^ji j^jg fubjeds of the dangers attendliig treafon 
and rebellion. The adviee was certainly rationaf,, 
but not eafy to be executed by the fmall revenue and 
limited authority of James. He defired, therefore, 
fome fupply from her of men and money ; but 
though fhe had reafon to deem the profecution of 
the three popifh earls a common eaufe, flie never 
could be prevailed on to grant him the leaft aflift- 
ance. The tenth part of the expence, which Ihe 
beftowed in fupporting the French king, and the' 
States, would have fufficed to execute this purpofe, 
more immediately elTential to her fecurity "^ : But fhe 
feems ever to have borne fome degree of malignity 
to James, whom ihe hated both as her heir and as 
the fon of Mary, her hated rival and competitor. 

So far from giving James affiftance to profecute 
the catholic confpirators, the queen rather contri- 
buted to increafe his inquietude, by countenancing 
the turbulent difpofition of the earl" of Bothwel % a 
nobleman defcended from a natural fon of James V, 
Bothwel more than once attempted to render himfelf 
mafler of the king's perfon ; and being expelled the 
kingdom for thefe traiterous enterprifes, he took 
fhelter in England, was fecretly protected by the 
queen, and lurked near the borders, where his 
power lay, with a view of ftill committing fome new 
violence. He fucceeded at lad in an attempt on 
the king, and, by the mediation of the Englifh am- 
baflador, impofed diflionourable terms upon that 
prince : But James, by the authority of the con- 
vention of dates, annulled this agreement as extort- 
ed by violence; again expelled Bothwel; and obliged 
him to take flielter in England. Elizabeth, pre- 
tending ignorance of the place of his retreat, never 
executed the treaties, by which fhe was bound to 
deliver up all rebels and fugitives to the Idng of 

'' Spotfwood, p. 393. Rymer, torn. xvi. p. 235. 
^ ^ SpotfwooJ, p. 257, 258, 

'I Scotland, 



ELIZABETH. 



373 



;IS94-. 



Scotland. During thefe diforders, increafed by the chap. 
refradory difpofition of the ecclefiaflics, the profe- ^^^^'^• 
cution of the cathoh'c earls remained in fufpenfe-; but 
at laft the parliament pafled an a£l of attainder againft 
them, and the king prepared himfelf to execute it 
by force of arms. The noblemen, though they ob- 
tained a vidory over the earl -of Argyle, who a6led 
by the king's commiffion, found themfelves hard 
prefled by James himfelf, and agreed on certain 
terms to leave the kingdom. Bothwel, being de- 
■teded in a confederacy with th^m, forfeited the fa- 
vour of Elizabeth ; and was obliged to take fhelter 
firfl; in France, then in Italy, where he died fome 
years after in great poverty. 

The eftablifhed authority of the queen fecured 
lier from all fuch attempts as James was expofed to 
from the mutinous difpofition of his fubjeds ; and 
her enemies found no other means of giving her 
domeftic difturbance than by fuch traiterous and 
perfidious machinations as ended in their own dif- 
grace, and in the ruin of their criminal inftruments, 
Roderigo Lopez, a Jew, domeftic pbyfician to the 
queen, being imprifoned on fufpicioo, confelfed that 
he had received a bribe to poifon her from Fuentes 
and Ibarra, who had fuccee4ed Parma, lately deceaf* 
ed, in the government of the Netherlands ; but h^ 
maintained, that he had no other intention than to 
cheat Philip of his money, and never meant to fulfil 
his engagement. He was, however, executed for 
the confpiracy ; and the queen complained to Philip 
of thefe difhonourable attempts of his minifters, but 
could obtain no fatisfadion ^ York and WilliamSy 
two EngUfli traitors, were afterwards executed for a 
confpiracy with Ibarra, equally atrocious ^. 

Instead of avenging herfelf, by retaliating in 
a Hke manner, Elizabeth fought a more honourable 

<" Camden, p. 577. Birch's Negot. p. T5, Bacon, ','oJ.Jv. p. 381. 
■? Cameen, p. 5?:, 

B b 3 vengeance., 



XLIII. 



374 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

c H A ^, vengeance, by fupporting the king of France, and 
^^ '^^ afiilting him in finally breaking the force of the 
league, which, after the convernon of that monarch, 
went daily to decay, and was threatened with fpeedy 
ruin and diffolution. Norris commanded the Englifh 
forces in Britanny, and ailifted at the taking of 
Morlaix, Quimpercorentin, and Breft, towns gar- 
rifoned by Spaniih forces. In every a<5lion,- the 
Englifh, though they had fo long enjoyed domeftic 
peace, difcovered a ilrong mihtary difpofition ; and 
the queen, though herfelf a heroine, found more 
frequent occafion to reprove her generals for encou- 
raging their temerity, than for countenancing their 
fear or caution ^ : Sir Martin Frobifher, her brave 
admiral, perilhed with many others before Breft. 
Morlaix had been promifed to the Englifli for a 
place of retreat ; but the duke d'Aumont, the French 
general, eluded this promife, by making it be in- 
ferted in the capitulation, that none but catholics 
fhould be admi'ited into that city. 
^.595- Next campaign, the French king, who had long 

carried on hoftilities with Philip, was at laft pro- 
voked, by the taking of Chatelet and Dourlens, 
and the attack of Cambray, to declare war againft 
that monarch. Elizabeth being threatened with a 
new invafion in England, and with an infurredtion 
in Ireland, recalled moft of her forces, and fent 
Norris to command in this latter kingdom. Find- 
ing alfo, that the French league was almoft entirely 
diflblved. and that the moft confiderable leaders had 
made an accommodation with their prince, flie 
thought that he could well fupport himfelf by his 
own force and valour ; and flie began to be more 
fparing in his caufe of the blood and treafure of her 
fubje^ls. 

Some difgufts which Ihe had received from the 
States, joined to the remonftrances of her frugal 

f> Camden^ p. 578. 

miniftey 



ELIZABETH. 375 

mmifler Burleigh, made her alfo inclined to dimi- chap. 
nifh her charges on that fide; and ilie even de- xliii. 
manded, by her ambaflador, fir Thomas Bodley, to ^ 

be reimburfed all the money which fhe had ex- 
pended in fupporting them. The States, befides 
alleging the conditions of the treaty, by which they 
were not bound to repay her till the conclufion of a 
peace, pleaded their prefent poverty and diftrefs, 
the great fuperiority of the Spaniards, and the diffi- 
culty in fupporting the war ; much more in faving 
money to difcharge their incumbrances. After 
much negotiation, a new treaty was formed ; by 
which the States engaged to free the queen imme- 
diately from the charge of the Englilh auxiliaries, 
computed at forty thoufand pounds a-year ; to pay 
her annually twenty thoufand pounds for fome years ; 
to affift her with a certain number of fhips ; and to 
conclude no peace or treaty without her confent. 
They alfo bound themfelves, on finilhing a peace 
with Spain, to pay her annually the fum of a hun- 
dred thoufand pounds for four years ; but on this 
condition, that the payment fliould be in lieu of all 
demands, and that they fhould be fupplied, though 
at their own charge, with a body of four thoufand 
auxiliaries from England '. 

The queen ftill retained in her hands the caution^ 
ary towns, which were a great check on the rifmg 
power of the States ; and fhe committed the im- 
portant truft of Flulhing to fir Francis Vere, a brave 
officer, who had diilinguiflied himfelf by his valour 
in the Low Countries. She gave him the prefer- 
ence to Eflex, who expected fo honourable a com- 
mand ; and though this nobleman was daily riling 
both in reputation with the people, and favour with 
herfelf, the queen, who was commonly referved in 
th€ advancement of her courtiers, thought proper 

* Camden, p. 586. 

B b 4. on 



376 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, on this occafion to give him a refufal. Sir Thomas 
K^^^^ Bafkerville was fent over to France at the head of 
I J96. ^^^ thoufand Engliih, with which Elizabeth, by a 
new treaty concluded with Henry, engaged to fup- 
ply that prince. Some flipulations for mutual affilt- 
ance were formed by the treaty ; and all former 
engagements were renewed. 
1597. This body of Engliih were maintained at the 

expente of the French king ; yet did Henry efteem 
the fupply of confiderable advantage, on account of 
the great reputation acquired by the Englifli, in fq 
many fortunate enterprifes undertaken againft: the 
common enemy. In the great battle of Tournholt, 
gained this campaign by prince Maurice, the Eng- 
lifli auxiliaries under fir Francis Vere and fir Robert 
Sydney had acquired honour; and the fuccefs of that 
day was univerially afcribed to their difcipline and 
valour. 
Naval en. Though EHzabcth, at a confiderable expence of 
terpjies. j^Jq^^^ ^^^^ treafure, made war againft Philip in 
France and the Low Countries, the moll fevere 
blows which fhe gave him were by thofe naval en- 
terprifes which either flie or her fubjeds fcarcely 
ever intermitted during one feafon. In 1594, Rich- 
ard Hawkins, fon of fir John, the famous navigator, 
procured the queen's commifTion, and failed with 
three fhips to the South Sea by the Straits of Ma- 
gellan : But his voyage proved unfortunate, and he 
himfelf w^as taken prifoner on the coafl of Chili. 
James Lancafler was fuppHed the fame year with 
three fhips and a pinnace by the merchants of Lon- 
don; and was more fortunate in his adventure. He 
took thirty-nine fliips of the enemy ; and not con- 
tent with this fuccefs, he made an attack on Fer- 
nambouc in Brazil, where he knew great treafures 
were at that time lodged. As he approached the 
fhore he faw it lined with great numbers of the ene- 
my ; but no- wife daunted at this appearance, he 

placed 



ELIZABETH. 377 

placed the ftoutefl of his men in boats, and ordered c 11 a p. 
them to row with fuch violence on the landing /„^viL^ 
place as to fplit them in pieces. By this bold ac- 1597. 
tion he both deprived his men of all refource but in 
viftory, and terrified the enemy, who fled after a 
fhort refiftance. He returned home with the trea- 
fure which he had fo bravely acquired. In 1595, 
fir Walter Raleigh, who had anew forfeited the 
queen's friendfhip by an intrigue with a maid of 
honour, and who had been thrown into prifon for 
this mlfdemeanor, no fooner recovered his liberty, 
than he was pufiied by his aftive and enterpriling 
genius to attempt fome great adlion. The fuccefs 
pf the firft Spanifh adventurers againft Mexico and 
Peru had begotten an ejctreme avidity in Europe ; 
and a prepolfeiTion univerfally took place, that in 
the inland parts of South America, called Guiana, 
a country as yet undifcovered, there were mines 
and treafures far exceeding any which Cortes or 
Pizzaro had met with. Raleigh, whofe turn of 
mind was fome what romantic and extravagant, 
undertook at his own charge the difcovery of this 
wonderful country. Having taken the fmall town 
of St. Jofeph in the ifle of Trinidado, where he 
found no riches, he left his fhip, and failed up the 
river Oroonoko in pinnaces, bur without meeting 
any thing to anfwer his expeftations. On his re- 
turn, he pubhflied an account of the country, full 
of the groflelt and moll palpable lies that were ever 
attempted to be impofed on the credulity of man- 
kind "". 

The fame year, fir Francis Drake and fir John 
Hawkins undertook a more important expedition 
againft the Spanifh fettlements in America ; and 
they carried with them fix Ihips of the queen's, and 
twenty more, which either were fitted out at their 
own charge, or were furnifhed them by private ad- 

^ Camden, p. 584.. 

» venturers, 



?597- 



378 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, venturers. Sir Thoraas Bafl^erville was appointed 
^lli J commander of the land forces, which they carried 
on board. Their firft defign was to attempt Porto 
Rico, where, they knew, a rich carrack was at that 
time ftationed ; but as they had not preferved the re- 
quifite fecrefy, a pinnace, having ilrayed from the 
fleet, was taken by the Spaniarri^^ and betrayed the 
intentions of the Englifh. Preparations were made 
in that ifland for their reception ; and the EngHfH 
fleet, notwithflanding the brave aiTault which they 
made on the enemy, was repulfed with lofs. Haw- 
kins foon after died ; and Drake purfued his voyage 
to Ncaibre di Dios, on the ifthmus of Darien ; 
where, having landed his men, he attempted to pafs 
forward to Panama, with a view of plundering that 
place, or, if he found fuch a fcheme pradlicable, of 
keeping and fortifying it. But he met not with the 
fame facility which had attended his firft enterprifes 
in thofe parts. The Spaniards, taught by expe- 
rience, had every where fortified the paffes, and had 
fl:ationed troops in the woods ; who fo infefted the 
Englifh by continual alarms and fkirmifhes, that 
they were obliged to return, without being able to 
effeft any thing. Drake himfelf, from the intem- 
perance of the climate^ the fatigues of his journey, 
and the vexation of his difappointment, was feized 
with a difiemper, of which he foon after died. Sir 
Thomas Bafkerville took the command of the fleet, 
which was in a weak condition j and after having 
fought a battle near Cuba with a Spanifh fleet, of 
which the event was not decifive, he returned to 
England. The Spaniards fuffered fome lofs from 
this enterprife ; but the Englifli reaped no profit'. 

The bad fuccefs of this enterprife in the Indies 
made the Englifh rather attempt the Spanifh domi- 
nions in Europe, where, they heard, Philip was 
making great preparations for a new invafion of 

J JVIonfon, p. 167. 

England t 



«5&7« 



ELIZABETH. 379 

England. A powerful fleet was equipped at Ply- chap. 
mouth, confiding of a hundred and feventy veflels, ^Liii, 
feventeen of which were capital fhips of war ; the reft 
tenders and fmall veffels : Twenty fhips were added 
by the Hollanders. In this fleet there were com- 
puted to be embarked fix thoufand three hundred 
and fixty foldiers, a thoufand volunteers, and fix 
thoufand feven hundred and feventy-two feamen, be- 
fide the Dutch. The land forces were commanded 
by the earl of Eflex : The navy by lord Efiingham, 
high-admiral. Both thefe commanders had expend- 
ed great fums of their own in the armament : For 
fuch was the fpirit of Ehzabeth's reign. Lord Tho- 
mas Howard, fir Walter Raleigh, hr Francis Vere, 
fir George Carew, and fir Coniers Clifford had com- 
mands in this expedition, and were appointed council 
to the general and admiral"". 

The fleet fet fail on the firft of June 1596 ; and 
meeting with a fair wind, bent its courfe to Cadiz, 
at which place, by fealed orders delivered to all 
the captains, the general rendezvous was appointed. 
They lent before them fome armed tenders, which 
intercepted every fliip that could carry intelligence 
to the enemy ; and they themfelves were fo fortu- 
nate when they came near Cadiz, as to take an Irifli 
veflel, by which they learned, that that port was 
full of merchant fhips of great value, and that the 
Spaniards lived in perfect fecurity, without any ap- 
prehenfions of an enemy. This intelligence much 
encouraged the Englifh fleet, and gave them the 
profpeft of a fortunate iflTue to the enterprife. 

After a fruitlefs attempt to land at St. Sebaftian's 
on the wefl"ern fide of the ifland of Cadiz ; it 
was, upon deliberation, refolved by the council of 
war to attack the fliips and gallies in the bay. Tiiis 
attempt was deemed rafh ; and the admiral himfelf, 
whb was cautious in his temper, had entertained 

n» Camden, p. 591. 

great 



38o HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, great fcruples with regard to it : But EiTex flrenu- 
XLlil. Qufiy recommended the enterprife ; and when he 
,.„ found the refolution at lafl: taken, he threw his hat 
into the fea, and gave fymptoms of the moft extra- 
vagant joy. He felt, hov/ever, a great mortifica- 
tion, when Effingham informed him, that the 
queen, anxious for his fafety, and dreading the 
effects of his youthful ardour, had fecretly given 
orders that he fhouid not be permitted to command 
the van in the attack". That duty was performed 
by fir Walter Raleigh and lord Thomas Howard ; 
but Effex no fooner came within reach of the enemy 
than he forgot the proniife which the admiral had 
exacled from him, to keep in the midfl of the fleet ; 
he broke through and preffed forward into the 
thickeft of the fire. Emulation for glory, avidity of 
plunder, animofity againfh the Spaniards, proved 
incentives to every one ; and the enemy was foon 
obliged to flip anchor and retreat farther into the 
bay, where they ran many of their lliips aground. 
Elfex then landed his men at the fort of Puntal j 
and immediately marched to the attack of Cadiz, 
which the impetuous valour of the Enghfh foon car- 
ried fword in hand. The generofity of Effex, not 
inferior to his valour, made him flop the flaughter, 
and treat his prifoners with the greateft humanity, 
and even affabihty and kindnefs. The Englifh 
made rich plunder in the city ; but miffed of a much 
richer by the refolution which the duke of Medina, 
the Spanifh admiral, took of fetting fire to the 
fhips, in order to prevent their falling into the 
hands of the enemy. It was computed that the lofs 
which the Spaniards fuflained in this enterprife 
amounted to twenty millions of ducats °; befides the 
indignity ,which that proud and ambitious people 
fuffered from the lacking of one pf their chief cities, 
and deftroying in their harbour a fleet of fuch force 
and value, 
n Monfon, p. 156, • Biich's Memoirs, vo], ii, p. 97- 

Essex, 



ELIZABETH. 2^^ 

Essex, all on fire for glory, regarded this great chap, 
fuccefs only as a ftep to future atchievements : He ^^i^J^^, 
infilled on keeping poflefTion of Cadiz ; and he un- ^^^^^ * 
dertook, with four hundred men and three months 
provifions, to defend the place till fuccours fhould 
arrive from England : But all the other feamen and 
foldiers were fatisfied with the honour which they 
had acquired ; and were impatient to return home 
in order to fecure their plunder. Every other pro- 
pofal of Efl'ex to annoy the enemy met with a like 
reception ; his fcheme for intercepting the carracks 
at the A^res, for alTaulting the Groine, for taking 
St. Andero, and St. Sebaftian : And the Englilh, 
finding it fo difficult to drag this impatient warrior 
from the enemy, at lad left him on the Spanifh 
coaft, attended by a very few fhips. He complained 
much to the queen of their want of fpirit in this en- 
terprife ; nor was llie pleafed that they had returned 
without attempting to intercept the Indian fleet ^ ; 
but the great fuccefs, in the enterprife of Cadiz, 
had covered all their mifcarriages : And that 
princefs, though fhe admired the lofty genius of 
ElTex, could not forbear expreffing an efteem for 
the other officers '^. The admiral was created earl 
of Nottingham ; and his promotion gave great dif- 
guft to Eflex ^ In the preamble of the patent ic 
was faid, that the new dignity was conferred on him 
on account of his good fervices in taking Cadiz, 
and deftroying the Spanifli fliips ; a merit which 
Effex pretended to belong folely to himfelf: And 
he .offered to maintain this plea by fmgle combat 
againil the earl of Nottingham, or his fons, or any 
of his kindred. 

The atchievements in the fubfequent year proved 
not fo fortunate ; but as the Indian fleet very nar- 
rowly efcaped the Englifli, Philip had fl:iil reafon to 
fee the great hazard and difadvantages of that war 

P Birch's Memoirs, vol. ii. p. 121. 1 Camden, p. 593. 

' bidney's Fapers, vol, ii'. p, 77. 

in 



3^« HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, in which he was engaged, and the fuperiority whicH 
^^||_;j^^ the Engliih, by their naval power, and their fituation; 
»597' ^^^ acquired over him. The queen having re- 
ceived intelligence that the Spaniards, though their 
fleets were fo much fliattered and deftroyed by the 
, expedition to Cadiz, were preparing a fquadron at 

Ferrol and the Groine, and were marching troops 
thither with a view of making a defcent in Ireland, 
was refolved to prevent their enterprife, and to de- 
flroy the Ihipping in thefe harbours. She prepared 
a large fleet of a hundred and twenty fail, of which 
feventeen were her own fhips, forty-three were 
fmaller veflels, and the refl tenders and victuallers : 
She embarked on board this fleet five thoufand newi 
levied foldiers, and added a thoufand veteran troopsj 
whom fir Francis Vere brought from the Nether- 
lands. The earl of Eflex, commander in chief both 
of the land and fea forces, was at the head of one 
fquadron ; Lord Thomas Howard was appointed 
vice-admiral of another : Sir Walter Raleigh of the 
third : Lord Mountjoy commanded the land forces 
under Efl^ex : Vere was appointed marflial : Sir 
George Carew lieutenant of the ordnance, and fir 
Chrifl:opher Blount firft colonel. The earls of Rut- 
land and Southampton, the lords Grey, Cromwell, 
and Rich, with feveral other perfons of difliinftion, 
embarked as volunteers. Eflex declared his refo- 
lution either to defl:roy the new Armada which threat* 
ened England, or to p.rifli in the attempt, 
gth July. This powerful fleet fet fail from Plymouth ; but 
were no fooner out of harbour than they met with a 
furious ftorm, which fliattered and difperfed them ; 
and before they could be refitted EflTex found that 
their provifions were fo far fpent, that it would not 
be fafe to carry fo numerous an army along with 
him. He difmHfed therefore all the foldiers, except 
the thoufand veterans under Vere ; and laying afide 
all thoughts of attacking Ferrol or the Grohie, he 
confined the objeft of his expedition to the inter- 
cepting 



ELIZABETH. 303 

cepting of the Indian fleet j which had at fir ft been chap. 
confidered only as the fecond enterprife which he ,^^^^1^ 
was to attempt. 1597. ' 

The Indian fleet in that age, by reafon of the 
imperfection of navigation, had a itated courfe as 
well as feafon, both in their going out and in their 
return ; and there were certain iflands at which, as 
at fixed ft ages, they always touched, and where they 
took in water and provisions. The Azores being 
one of thefe places where about this time the fleet 
was expetted, -Eflex bent his courfe thither; and he 
informed Raleigh, that he, on his arrival, intended 
to attack Fayal, one of thefe iflands. By fome ac- 
cident the fquadrons were feparated ; and Raleigh 
arriving firft before Fayal, thought it more prudent, 
after waiting fome time for the general, to begin 
the attack alone, left the inhabitants fliould by far- 
ther delay have leifure to make preparations for 
their defence. He fucceeded in the enterprife ; but 
Elfex, jealous of Raleigh, exprefled great difplea- 
fure at his conducl, and conftrued it as an intention 
of robbing the general of the glory which attended 
that a61;ion : He cafliiered therefore Sydney, Bret, 
Berry, and others, who had concurred in the at- 
tempt ', and would have proceeded to inflict the 
fame punifliment on Raleigh himfelf, had not lord 
Thomas Howard interpofed with his good offices, 
and perfuaded Raleigh, though high-fpirited, to 
make fubmifllons to the general. Effex, who was 
placable as well as hafty and paflionate, was foon 
appeafed, and both received Raleigh into favour, 
and reftored the other officers to their commands % 
This incident, however, though the quarrel was ^ 
feemingly accommodated, laid the firft foundation 
of that violent animofity which afterwards took 
place between thefe two gallant commanders. 

» Monfon, p. 173, 

Essex 



§54 History of England. 

CHAP. Essex made next a difpofition proper for inter- 
^5i||^^ cepting the Indian galleons ; and fir William Mon» 
J 557. fon, whofe ftation was the moil remote of the fleet, 
having fallen in with them, made the fignals which 
had been agreed on. That able officer, in his Me- 
tnoirs, afcribes EfTex's failure, when he was fo near 
attaining fo mighty an advantage, to his want of ex- 
perience in feamanfhip; and the account which he 
gives of the errors committed by that nobleman, 
appears very reafonable as well as candid ^ The 
Spanilh fleet, finding that the enemy was upon them^ 
made all the fail pofllble to the Terceras, and got 
into the fafe and well-fortihed harbour of .Angra, 
before the Englifli fleet could overtake them. EflTex 
intercepted only three fliips ; which, however, were 
fo rich as to repay all the charges of the expedition. 
The caufes of the mifcarriage in this enterprife 
were much canvafled in England, upon the return 
of the fleet ; and though the courtiers took part dif-' 
ferently, as they aflefted either Efl'ex or' Raleigh, 
the people in general, who bore an extreme regard 
to the gallantry, fpirit, and generofity of the form.er, 
were inclined to juflify every circumfl:ance of his 
conduct. The queen, who loved the one as much 
as flie efl:eemed the other, maintained a kind of 
neutrality, and endeavoured to Ihare her favours 
with an impartial hand between the parties. Sir 
Robert Cecil, fecond fon of lord Burleigh, was a 
courtier of promifing hopes, much connedled with 
Raleigh ; and flie made him fecretary of ftate, pre- 
ferably to fir Thomas Bodley, whom Eflex recom- 
mended for that office. But not to difguft Efl'ex, 
fhe promoted him to the dignity of earl marfhal of 
England ; an office which had been vacant fmce the 
, death of the earl of Shrewfbury. Eflex might per- 
ceive from this conduft, that flie never intended to 
give him the entire afcendant over his rivals, and 

* Monfon, p. 174. 

might 



ELIZABETH. 385 

might thence learn the neceflity of moderation and chap. 
caution. But his temper was too high for fubmif- »^^i^ij^ 
(ion ; his behaviour too open and candid to pradlife ,-oy, 
the arts of a court ; and his free fallies, while they 
rendered him but more amiable in the eyes .of good 
judges, gave his enemies many advantages againfl 
him. 

The war with Spain, though fuccefsful, having a^tlioa, 
cxhaufted the queen's exchequer, fhe was obliged to 
aflemble a parliament ; where Yelverton, a lawyer, 
was chofen fpeaker of the houfe of commons". 
Elizabeth took care, by the mouth of fir Thomas 
Egerton, lord keeper, to inform this alfembly of the 
neceffity of a fupply. She faid, That the wars for- 
merly waged in Europe had commonly been con- 
duced by the parties without farther view than to 
gain a few towns, or at moft a province, from each 
other ; but the objedl of the prefent hoflilities, on 
the part of Spain, was no other than utterly to be- 
reave England of her religion, her liberty, and her 
independence : That thefe bleffrngs, however, fhe 
herfelf had hitherto been able to preferve, in fpite of 
the devil, the pope, and the Spanilh tyrant, and all 
the mifchievous defigns of all her enemies : That 
in this contefl fhe had difburfed a fum triple to all 
the parliamentary fupplies granted her ; and, befides 
expending her ordinary revenues, had been obliged 
to fell many of the crown lands : And that fhe 
could not doubt but her fubjefts, in a caufe where 
their own honour and intereft were fo deeply con- 
cerned, would willingly contribute to fuch moderate 
taxations as fhould be found neceffary for the com- 
mon defence ''. The parliament granted her three 
fubfidies and fix fifteenths ; the fame fupply which 
had been given four years before, but which had 

" See note [HH] at the end of tlie volume. 
* D'Ewes, p. 525. 517. Towr.fend, p. 79. 

Vol. v. C q then 



J597. 



385' HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, then appeared fo unufual, that they had voted It • 
^lli* > ^^^^^ never afterwards be regarded as a prece- 
dent. 

The commons, this fefiion, ventured to engage 
in two controverfies about forms with the houfe of 
peers ; a prelude to thofe encroachments which, as 
they affumed more courage, they afterwards made 
upon the prerogatives of the crown. They com- 
plained, that the lords failed in civility to them, by 
receiving their meflages fitting with their hats on ; 
and that the keeper returned an anfwer in the fame 
negligent pofture : But the upper houfe proved to 
their full fatisfaftion, that they were not entitled by. 
cuftom and the ufage of parliament to any more 
refpe£l ^. Some amendments had been made by 
the lords to a bill fent up by the commons ; and 
thefe amendments were written on parchment, and 
returned with the bill to the commons. The lower 
houfe took umbrage at the novelty: They pretended 
that thefe amendments ought to have been written 
on paper, not on parchment ; and they complained 
of this innovation to the peers. The peers replied, 
that they expected not fuch a frivolous objedion 
from the gravity of the houfe ; and that it was not 
material whether the amendments were written on 
parchment or^on paper, nor whether the paper were 
white, black, or brown. The commons were of- 
fended at this reply, which feemed to contain a 
mockery of them ; and they complained of it, 
though without obtaining any fatisfaction ^. 

An application was made, by way of petition, to 
the queen from the lower houfe, againft monopolies; 
an abufe which had arifen to an enormous height ; 
^nd they received a gracious, though a general an- 
•fwer, for which they returned their thankful ac- 

y D'Ewea, p. 539, ^40. 580. 585, Towiifend, p. 93, 94, 95. 
* D'Ewes, p. 576, 577, J 

know- 



ELIZABETH: 3^7 

I^nowledgments'. But not to give them too much' ^^Jt?' 
encouragement in fuch applications, fhe told them^ v^,„^v-^ 
in the fpeech which fhe dehvered at their difTolution, 1597. 
*' That with regard to thefe patents, fhe hoped that 
*' her dutiful and loving fubjefts would not take 
** away her prerogative, which is the chief flower in 
** her garden, and the principal and head pearl in- 
" her crown and diadem ; but that they would ra-- 
** ther leave thefe matters to her difpofal \" The 
commons alfo took notice, this feffion, of fome 
tranfaftions in the court of high commiflion ; but 
not till they had previouily obtained permiffion from, 
her majefty to that purpofe '. 

Elizabeth had reafon to forefee that parlia^ 159?^ 
mentary fupplies would now become more neceffary 
to her than ever ; and that the chief burden of the 
war with Spain would thenceforth lie upon England. 
Henry had received an overture for peace with 
Philip ; but before he would proceed to a nego- 
tiation, he gave intelligence of it to his allies, the 
queen and the States ; that if pofTible a general pa- 
cification might be made by common agreement. 
Thefe two powers fent ambaifadors to France in 
order to remonftrate againfh peace ; the queen, fit 
Robert Cecil, and Henry Herbert ; the States, 
Juftin NalTau, and John Barnevelt. Henry faid to 
thefe minifters. That his early education had been 
amidft war and danger, and he had paffed the whole 
courfe of his life either in arms or in military prepa- 
rations : That after the proofs which he had given 
of his alacrity in the field, no one could doubt but 
he would willingly, for his part, have continued in 
a courfe of life to which he w^as now habituated, till 
the common enemy were reduced to fuch a con- 
dition as no longer to give umbrage either to him 

» D'Ewes, p. 570. 573. >• Ibid, p, 54,7. 

' Ibid. p. SJ7. 558. 

C C 2 QT 



388 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

c H A P. or to his allies : That no private interefts of hh 
^][;J^^ own, not even thofe of his people, nothing but the 
xcq8. moft invincible neceffity, could ever induce him to 
think of a feparate peace with Philip, or make him 
embrace meafures not entirely conformable to the 
wifhes of all his confederates : That his kingdom, 
torn with the convulfions and civil wars of near half 
a century, required fome interval of repofe, ere it 
could reach a condition in which it might fuftain 
itfelf, much more fupport its allies : That after the 
minds of his fubjefts were compofed to tranquillity, 
and accuftomed to obedience, after his finances were 
brought, into order, and after agriculture and the 
arts were reftored, France, inflead of being a bur- 
den, as at prefent, to her confederates, would be 
able to lend them effectual fuccour, and amply to 
repay them all the alTiftance which fhe had received 
during her calamities : And that, if the ambition of 
Spain would not at prefent grant them fuch terms 
as they fhould think reafonable, he hoped that in a 
little time he fhould attain fuch a fituation as would 
enable him to mediate more efteftually, and with 
more decifive authority, in their behalf. 

The ambalTadors were fenfible that thefe reafons 
were not feigned ; and they therefore remonftrated 
with the lefs vehemence againfl the meafures which 
they faw Henry was determined to purfue. The 
States knew that that monarch was interefted never 
to permit their final ruin ; and having received pri- 
vate affurances that he would ftill, notwithftanding 
the peace, give them afliflance both of men and 
money, they were well pleafed to remain on terms 
of amity with him. His greatefl concern was to 
.give fatisfaCi-ion to Elizabeth for this breach of 
treaty. He had a cordial efteem for that .princefs, 
a fympathy of manners, and a gratitude for the ex- 
traordinary favours which he had received from her 
during his greatefl difficulties : And he ufed every 

expedient 



ELIZABETH. 389 

expedient to apologize and atone for that meafure c h a ?. 
which neceflity extorted from him. But as Spain ^^^'^^• 
refufed to treat with the Dutch as a free ftate, and |,Qg. 
Elizabeth would not negotiate without her ally, 
Henry found himfelf obliged to conclude at Vervins ''eaceof 
a feparate peace, by which he recovered pofleflion ^^'^'"*' 
of all places feized by Spain during the courib 
of the civil wars, and procured to himlelf leifure to 
purfue the domeftic fettlement of his kingdom. 
His capacity for the arts of peace was not inferior 
to his military talents ; andj in a little time, by his 
frugality, order, and wife government, he raifed 
France from the defolation and mifery in which fhe 
was involved, to a more flourifhing condition than 
Ihe had ever before enjoyed. 

The queen knew that fhe could alfo, whenever 
fhe pleafed, finifh the war on equitable terms ; and 
that PhiHp, having no claims upon her, would be 
glad to free himfelf from an enemy who had foiled 
him in every conteft, and who ftill had it fo much 
in her power to make him feel the weight of her 
arms. Some of her wifefl counfellors, particularly 
the treafurer, advifed her to embrace pacific mea- 
fures ; and fet before her the advantages of tran- 
quillity, fecurity, and frugality, as more confider-. 
able than any fuccefs which could attend the greatell 
vidtories. But this high-fpirited princefs, though at 
firil adverfe to war, feemed now to have attained 
fuch an afcendant over the enemy, that fhe* was un- 
willing to flop the courfe of her profperous fortune. 
She confidered that her fituation and her pafl 
viftories had given her entire fecurity againft any 
dangerous invafion ; and the war mufl thenceforth 
be conduced by fudden enterprifes and naval ex- 
peditions, in which fhe pofTefTed an undoubted fu- 
periority : That the weak condition of Philip in 
the Indies, opened to her the view of the moil 
durable advantages j and the yearly return of his 
C c 3 treafure 



35>o HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, treafure by fea afforded a continual profpe<^ of im- 
y^^,^.;^^^^ portant, though more temporary, fucceffes ; That, 
1^98. after his peace with France, if fhe alfo fliould con-, 
fipnt to an accommodation, he would be able to turn 
his whole force againft the revolted provinces of the 
Netherlands, which, though they had furprifingly 
increafed their power by commerce and good go- 
vernment, were itill unable, if not fupported by their 
confederates, to maintain war againft fo potent a 
monarch : And that, as her defence of that com- 
monwealth was the original ground of the quarrel, 
it was unfafe as well as difhonourable to abandon its 
(caufe, till fhe had placed it in a ftate of greater fe- 
curity. 

These reafons were frequently inculcated on her 
by thg earl of Eflex, whofe paflion for glory, as well 
as his military talents, made him earneltly defire the 
continuance of war, from which he expected to reap 
Thjeaii f^ much advantage and diitindion. The rivalfhip 
* "^** between this nobleman and lord Burleigh made each 
of them infiil the more ftrenuoufly on his own 
counfel ; but as Eifex's perfon was agreeable to the 
queen, as well as his advice conformable to her in- 
clinations, the favourite feemed daily to acquire an 
afcendant over the minifter. Had he been endowed 
with caution and felf-command equal to. his fhining 
qualities, he would have fo rivetted himfelf in the 
queen's confidence, that none of his enemies had 
ever been able to impeach his credit. But his lofty 
fpirit could ill fubmit to that implicit deference 
which her temper required, and which flie had ever, 
been acicuftomed to receive from all her fubje(5fs. 
Being once engaged in a difpute with her about the 
jchoice of a goyernour for Ireland, he was fo heated 
jn the argument, that he entirely forgot the rules 
both of duty and civility j and turned his back upon 
her in a contemptuous manner. Her anger, n^- 
Jurally prompt and violent, rofe at this provocation j 
. ' and 



ELIZABETH. 391 

and /he Inftantly gave him a box on the ear; adding chap. 
a pafTionate exprcffion fuited to his impertinence. v.ii^ 
Inftead of recoIle£ting himfelf, and making the fub- ,,^8. 
miffions due to her fex and ftation, he clapped his 
hand to his fword, and fwore that he would not 
bear fuch ufage, were it from Henry VIII. him- 
felf; and he immediately withdrew from court. 
Egerton the chancellor, who loved Eflex, exhorted 
him to repair his indifcretion, by proper acknow- 
ledgments ; and entreated him not to give that 
triumph to his enemies, that afflidion to his friends, 
which mufl enfue from his fupporting a contefl: 
with his fovereign, and deferting the fervice of his 
country : But EfTex was deeply flung with the dif- 
honour which he had received ; and feemed to think 
that an infult which might be pardoned in a wo- 
man, was become a mortal affront when it came 
from his fovereign. " If the vilefl of all indignities," 
faid he, " is done me, does religion enforce me to 
*' fue for pardon ? Doth God require it ? Is it im- 
" piety not to do it ? Why ? Cannot princes err ? 
" Cannot fubjefts receive wrong ? Is an earthly 
" power infinite ? Pardon me, my lord, I can never 
*' iubfcribe to thefe principles. Let Solomon's 
*' fool laugh when he is ftricken ; let thofe that 
*^ mean to make their profit of princes, fhew no 
" fenfe of princes' injuries: Let them acknowledge 
" an infinite abfolutenefs on earth, that do not be-' 
" lieve an abfolute infinitenefs in heaven" (allud- 
ing probably to the character and conduft of fir 
Walter Raleigh, who lay under the reproach of im* 
piety ) : " As for me," continued he, " I have re- 
*' ceived wrong, I feel it : My caufe is good, r 
*' know it ; and whatfoever happens, all the powers 
*' on earth can n?ver exert more ilrength and con- 
*' ftancy in opprefling, than I can fhew in fuffering 
_f' every thing that can or fhall be impofed upoa 
♦' me. Your lordfliip, in the beginning of youi^ 
•* letter, makes me a player, and yourfelf a looker^ 

C c 4. ^* QXi% 



39^ 



HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 



CHAP. " on: And me a player of my own game, fo you 
^^^iil; " ^^y ^^^ n^ore than I : But give me leave to tell 
1-98. " y*^^' ^^^^ fince you do but fee, and I do fuffer, I 
" mufl of neceflity feel more than you ''.'* 
■ This fpirited letter was fhown by Effex to his 
friends ; and they were fo imprudent as to difperfe 
copies of it: Yet, notwithftanding this additional 
provocation, the queen's partiality was fo prevalent, 
that ihe reinftated him in his former favour ; and 
her kindnefs to him appeared rather to have acquired 
new force from this fliort interval of anger and re- 

4th Aug. fentment. The death of Burleigh, his antagonift, 
which happened about the fame time, feemed to 
enfure him conflant pofleffion of the queen's con- 
fidence ; and nothing indeed but his own indifcre- 
tion could thenceforth have fhaken his well-efta- 
bllihed credit. Lord Burleigh died in an advanced 
age; and by a rare fortune was equally regretted by 
his fovereign and the people. He had rifen gra- 
dually from fmall beginnings, by the mere force of 
merit ; and though his authority was never entirely 
abfolute or uncontrolled with the queen, he was 
flill, during the courfe of near forty years, regarded 
as her principal minifter. None of her other incli- 
nations or affedlions could ever overcome her confi- 
dence in fo ufeful a counfellor ; and as he had had 
the generofity or good fenfe to pay afliduous court 
to her during her fifter's reign, when it was dan- 
gerous to appear her friend, fhe thought herfelf 
bound in gratitude, when fhe mounted the throne, 
to perfevere in her attachments to him. He feems 
not to have polTefled any fhinihg talents of addrefs, 
eloquence, or imagination ; and was chiefly diftin- 
guiflied by folidity of underftanding, probity of 
manners, and indefatigable application in bufmefs : 
Virtues which, if they do not always enable a man 
to attain high flations, do certainly qualify him bell 

•* See note [II] at the end of the volume, 

4. for 



ELIZABETH. 393 

for filling them. Of all the queen's minillers, he chap. 
alone left a confiderable fortune to his pofterity ; a v^iJ^L/ 
fortune not acquired by rapine or oppreffion, but ,598. 
gained by the regular profits of his offices, and pre- 
ferved by frugality. 

The lad aft of this able minifter was the con- 8tli Aug. 
eluding of a new treaty with the Dutch ; who, after 
being in fome meafure deferted by the king of 
France, were glad to preferve the queen's alliance, 
by fubmitting to any terms which fhe pleafed to re- 
quire of them. The debt which they owed her was 
now fettled at eight hundred thoufand pounds : Of 
this fum they agreed to pay, during the war, thirty 
thoufand pounds a-year ; and thefe payments were 
to continue till four hundred thoufand pounds of the 
debt fhould be extinguilhed. They engaged alfo, 
during the time that England fhould continue the 
war with Spain, to pay the garrifons of the caution- 
ary towns. They ftipulated, that if Spain fhould 
invade England, or the Ifle of Wight or Jerfey, or 
Scilly, they fhould alTift her with a body of five 
thoufand foot, and five hundred horfe ; and that in 
cafe fhe undertook any naval armament againfl 
Spain, ihey fhould join an equal number of fhips to 
her's % By this treaty the queen was eafed of an 
annual charge of a hundred and twenty thoufand 
pounds. 

Soon after the death of Burleigh, the queen, who 
regretted extremely the lofs of fo wife and faithful a 
minifter, was informed of the death of her capital 
enemy, Philip II. who, after languifhing under many 
inhrmities, expired in an advanced age at Madrid* 
This haughty prince, defirous of an accommoda- 
tion with his revolted fubjefts in the Netherlands, 
but difdaining to make in his own name the con- 
cefTions neceffary for that purpofe, had transferred 
to his daughter, married to archduke Albert, the 

* Rymer, rol. xvi. p. 34-3. 

title . 



394 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, title to the Low Country provinces ; bait as it was 
^^^^3, not expected that this princefs could have pofterity, 
j.^2. and as the reverfion on failure of her iifue was ftill 
referved to the crown of Spain, the States confi- 
dered this deed only as the change of a name, and 
they perfifted with equal obftinacy in their refiftance 
to the Spanifh arms. The other powers alfo of 
Europe made no dillin£lion between the courts of 
Bruffels and Madrid; and the fecret oppofition of 
France, as well as the avowed efforts of England, 
continued to operate againft the progrefs of Alberts 
as it had done againfl that of Philip. 



ELIZABETH, 395 



CHAP. XLIV. 

Btaie of Ireland — * — Tyrone^s rebellmi Effe:i fcnt 

over to Ireland His ill fuccefs Returns to 

England Is difgraced His intrigues ■ '■■ 

His infurredion His trial and execution • 

French affairs Moiintjo'fs fuccefs in Ireland 

-^Defeat of the Spaniards and IriJiD A 

■parliament Tyrone's fub?niffion ^een^s 

ftcknefs — aiid death — and charaiter* 

THOUGH the dominion of the Engllfh over C H A IP. 
Ireland had been feemingly eftabhflied above ^^^^^lij 
four centuries, it may lafely be affirmed, that their ,599. 
authority had hitherto been Httle more than nomi- State of 
nal. The Irifh princes and nobles, divided among 
themfelves, readily paid the exterior marks of obei- 
fance to a power which they were not able to refifl; 
but as no durable force was ever kept on foot to re- 
tain them in their d uty, they relapfed ftill into their 
former Hate of independence. Too weak to intro- 
duce order and obedience among the rude inhabit- 
;ants, the Englifh authority was yet fufficient to 
check the growth of any enterprifing genius among 
^he natives : And though it could beftow no true 
form of civil government, it was able to prevent the 
rife of any fuch form, from the internal combina- 
nation or policy of the Iriih ^. 

Most of the Englifli inflitutions likewife by 
which that ifland was governed, were to the laft 
degree abfurd, and fuch as no (late before had ever 
thought of, for preferving dominion over its con- 
quered provinces. 



Ireland. 



» Sjr J. Davles, p. 5, $, 7, &c. 



396 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

c HAP. The Englifli nation, all on fire for the proje^ of 
^^^f^J^^ fubduing France, a project whofe fuccefs was the 
,35,,. moft improbable, and would to them have proved 
the moft pernicious ; negleded all other entexprifes, 
to which their fituation fo ftrongly invited them, 
and which in time would have brought them an ac- 
ceftion of riches, grandeur, arid fecurity. The fmall 
army which they maintained in Ireland they never 
fupplied regularly with pay ; and as no money could 
be levied on the ifland, which poireffed none, they 
gave their loldiers the privilege of free quarter upon 
the natives. Rapine and infolence inflamed the 
hatred which prevailed between the conquerors and 
the conquered: Want of fecurity among the Iri(h 
introducing defpair, nouriflied ftill more the iloth 
natural to that uncultivated people. 

But the Englifh carried far4:her their ill-judged 
tyranny. Inftead of inviting the Irilh to adopt 
the more civilized cuftoms of their conquerors, they 
even refufed, though earneftly foHcited, to com- 
. municate to them the privilege of their laws, and 
every where marked them out as aliens and as ene- 
mies. Thrown out of the protection of juftice, the 
natives could find no fecr.rity but in force ; and fly- 
ing the neighbourhood of cities, which they could 
not approach with fafety, they Iheltered themfelves 
in their marilies and forefts from the infolence of 
their inhuman mafters. Being treated like wild 
beafts, they became fuch ; and joining the ardour of 
revenge to their yet untamed barbarity, they grew 
every day more intratlable and more dangerous ''. 

As the Englifh princes deemed the conqueft of 
the difperfed Irifli to be more the objeft of time and 
patience than the fource of military glory, they will- 
ingly delegated that office to private adventurers, 
who, inliiling foldiers at their own charge, reduced 
provinces of that ifland, which they converted to 

^ Sir J, Davies, p, loi^ 103, &c» 

their 



ELIZABETH. 



397 



their own profit. Separate jurifdiclions and princi- CHap. 
palities were eftabliihed by thefe lordly conquerors : ^.^^^^ 
The power of peace and war was aflumed: Mill- ^. 
tary law was exercifed over the Irifh, whom they 
fubdued ; and by degrees over the Englifh, by 
whofe affiftance they conquered : And, after their 
authority had once taken root, deeming the Eng- 
lifh inftitutions lefs favourable to barbai'ous domi- 
nion, they degenerated into mere Iriih, and aban- 
doned the garb, language, manners, and laws of 
their mother country". 

By all this imprudent condu(9: of England, the 
natives of its dependent ftate remained flill in that 
abjeft condition, into which the northern and weft- 
ern parts of Europe were funk, before they received 
civility and flavery from the refined policy and irre- . 
fiftible bravery of Rome. Even at the end of the 
iixteenth century, when every chriftian nation was 
cultivating with ardour every civil art of life, that 
ifland, lying in a temperate climate, enjoying a 
fertile foil, acceffible in its fituation, poffelfed of 
innumerable harbours, was ftill, notwithftanding 
thefe advantages, inhabited by a people whofe cuf- 
toms and manners approached nearer thofe of 
favages than of barbarians ''. 

As the rudenefs and ignorance of the Irifh were 

extreme, they were funk below the reach of that 

ciiriofity and love of novelty, by which every other 

people in Europe had been feized at the beginning 

of that century, and which had engaged them in 

innovations and religious difputes, with which they 

were flill fo violently agitated. The ancient fuper- 

flirion, thepraftices and obfervances of their fathers, 

■ mingled and polluted with many wild opinions, ftil! 

maintained an unfhaken empire over them ; and 

the example alone of the Englifh was fufficient to 

render the reformation odious to the prejudiced and 

'=■ Sir J. Dnvies, p. 133, 134, &c. 

^ See Spencci's Atcount of Iieland, throughout. 

difcon- 



39« HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, difcontented Irifh. The old oppofition of manners^; 

^^^^^^ZLj laws, and intereft, was now inflamed by religious 

»599« antipathy ; and the fubduing and civilizing of that 

country feemed to become every day more difficult 

and more impracticable. 

The animofity agaiilfl the Englifh was carried fo 
far by the Iriih, that, in an infur region raifed by 
two fons of the earl of Clanricarde, they put to the 
fword all the inhabitants of the town of Athenry, 
though Irifh, becaufe they began to conform them- 
felves to Enghfh cufloms, and had embraced a 
more civilized form of life than had been praftifed 
by their anceilors''. 

The ufual revenue of Ireland amounted only to 
fix thoufand pounds a-year^ : The queen, though 
with much repining '^, commonly added twenty 
thoufand more, which fhe remitted from England : 
And with this fmall revenue a body of a thoufand 
men was fupported, which on extraordinary emer- 
gencies was augmented to two thoufand ^. No won- 
der that a force fo difproportioned to the objed, 
inftead of fubduing a mutinous kingdom, ferved 
rather to provoke the natives, and to excite thofe 
frequent infurreftions, which flill farther inflamed 
the animofity between the two nations, and in- 
creafed the diforders to which the Irifh were natu- 
rally fubjedl. 

In 1560, Shan O'Neale, or the great O'Neale, 
as the Irifh called him, becaufe head of that potent 
clan, raifed a rebellion in Ulfter ; but after fome 
(kirmifhes he was received into favour upon his fub- 
miffion, and his promife of a more dutiful behaviour 
for the future \ This impunity tempted him to 
undertake a new infurredion in 1567J but being 

.* Camden, p. 457. « Memoirs of the Sidneys, vol. i. 

p. 86. f Gox, p. 34*. Sidney, vol. i. p. 85. aoo. 

g Camden, p. 541. Sidney, vol. i. p. 6j. 105. 183, 184. 
k Camden, p. 385. 391. 

puflied 



ELIZABETH. 399 

ptifhed by fir Henry Sidney, lord deputy, he re- c H a P, 
treated into Clandeboy, and rather than fubmit to ,J^f^^ 
the Enghfli, he put himfelf into the hands of fome ,599, 
Scottifh iflanders, who commonly infefted thofe parts 
by their incurfions. The Scots, who retained a 
quarrel againft him on account of former injuries, 
violated the laws of hofpitality, and murdered him 
at a felHval to which they had invited him. He 
was a man equally noted for his pride, his violence, 
his debaucheries, and his hatred to the Englifh na- 
tion. He is faid to have put fome of his followers 
to death becaufe they endeavoured to introduce the 
uie of bread after the hnghfti fafliion*. Though 
To violent an enemy to luxury, he was extremely 
addided to riot ; and was accuftomed, after his in- 
temperance had thrown him into a fever, to plunge 
his body into mire, that he might allay the flame 
which he had raifed by former excefles''. Such was 
the life led by this haughty barbarian, who fcorned 
the title of the earl of Tyrone, which Elizabeth in- 
tended to have reflored to him, and who aflUmed the 
rank and appellation of king of Ulfter. He ufed alfo 
to fay, that though the queen was his fovereign 
lady, he never made peace with her but at her 
feeking'. 

Sir Henry Sidney was one of the wifeft and moft 
active governors that Ireland had enjoyed for feve- 
ral reigns "" ; and he poffeffed his authority eleven 
years, during which he ftruggled with many difH- 
culties, and made fome progrefs in reprefling thofe 
diforders which had become inveterate among the 
people. The earl of Dennond, in 1569, gave him 
difturbance, from the hereditary animofity which 
prevailed between that nobleman and the earl of 
Ormond, defcended from the only family eflablifhed 
in Ireland, that had fleadiiy maintained its loyalty 

i Camden, p. 409* •'<^ Ibid. p. 4.09, Cox, p. 324. 

^ Ibid, p, jai, "^ Cox, p. 350, 

I to 



400 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, to the Englifh crown". The earl of Thomond, in 
J^^!\^ ^Sy^i attempted a rebellion in Connaught, but 
,599. was obliged to fly into France before his defigns; 
were ripe for execution, Stukely, another fugitive, 
found fuch credit with the pope, Gregory the XlHth, 
that he flattered that pontiff with the profpedt of 
making his nephew, Buon Compagno, king of 
Ireland ; and, as if this projed had already taken 
effect, he accepted the title of marquis ^of Leinller 
from the new fovereign°. He paffed next into 
Spain ; and after having received much encourage* 
ment and great rewards from Philip, who intended 
to employ him as an inftrument in diflurbing Eli- 
zabeth, he was found to poffefs too little interefl: for 
executing thofe high promifes which he had made 
to that monarch. He retired into Portugal ; and 
following the fortunes of don Sebaftian, he periflied 
with that gallant prjnce in his bold but unfortunate 
expedition againfl the Moors. 

Lord Gray, after fome interval, fucceeded to the 
government of Ireland,; and in 1579 fuppreflfed a 
new rebellion of the earl of Defmond, though fup- 
ported by a body of Spaniards and Italians. The 
rebellion of the Bourks followed a few years after ; 
occafioned by the fl:rict and equitable adminifl:ration 
of fir Richard Bingham, governor of Connaught, 
who endeavoured to reprefs the tyranny of the chief- 
tains over their vaimls''. The queen, finding ire- 
land fo burthenfome to her, tried feveral expedients 
for reducing it to a flate of greater order and fubmif- 
jfion. She encouraged the earl oi Effex, father to that 
nobleman who was afterwards her favourite, to at- 
tempt the fubduing and planting of Clandeboy, Fer- 
ny, and other territories, part of fome late forfeitures: 
But that enterprife proved unfortunate ; and Eflex 
died of a difl:emper occafioned, as is fuppofed, by the 

ft CamdcTi, p. 414., " Ibid. 11.430. Cox, p. 354. 

f Stow«, p. yzo. 

vexation 



E L I Z A B E T li. ' 401 

Vexation which he had conceived from his difap- CHAP. 
pointments. An univerfity was founded in Dublin vi![i]^, 
\^ath a view of introducing arts and learning into ,5^,^, 
that kingdom, and civilizing the uncultivated man^ 
ners of the inhabitants '^. But the moil unhappy 
expedient employed in the government of Ireland 
was that made ufe of in 15S5 by fir John Perrot^ 
at that time lord deputy : He put arms into the 
hands of the Irifh inhabitants of Ulfter, in order to 
enable them, without the aHiftance of the govern-- 
ment, to reprefs the incur fions of the Scottifh 
iflanders, by which thefe parts were much infefled'. 
At the fame time, the invitations of Fhihp, joined 
to their zeal for the catholic religion, engaged many 
of the gentry to ferve in the Low Country wars; 
and thus Ireland being provided with officers and 
foldiers, with d'Tcipline and arms, became formi- 
dable to the Englifli, and was thenceforth able to 
maintain a more regular war againft her ancient 
mailers, 

Hugh O'Neale, nephew to Shan O'Neale, had Tyrone's 
been railed by the queen to the dignity of earl of 
Tyrone j but having murdered his coufm, fon of 
that rebel, and beiiig acknowledged head of his 
clan, he preferred the pride of barbarous licence 
and dominion to the pleafures of opulence and tran- 
quillity, and he fomented all thofe diforders by 
which he hoped to weaken or overturn the Engllih 
government. He w^as noted for the vices of perfidy 
and cruelty, fo common among uncultivated na- 
tions ; and was alfo eminent for courage, a virtue 
which their diforderly courfe of life requires, and 
which, notwithftanding, being lefs fupported by the 
principle of honour, is commonly more precarious 
among them, than among a civilized people. Ty- 
rone, actuated by this fpirit, fecretly fomented the 

< Camden, p. 566, ' Nanton's Fragrnenta Regalia, p. 403. 

Vol. V. D d difcontents 



t 



4c:j HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, dlfcontents of the Maguires, O'Donnels, O'RourkJ- 
,^_^^.^^ Macmahons, and other rebels j yet, trufting to the 
151,9. inuuence of his deceitful oaths and profeffions, he 
put himfelf into the hands of fir William Ruffel, 
who, in the year 1594, was fent over deputy to Ire- 
land. Contrary to the advice and proteftation of 
fir Henry Bagnal, marlhal of the army, he was dif- 
niiffed ; and returning to his own country, he em- 
braced the reiblution of raifmg an open rebellion, 
and of relying no longer on the lenity or inexpe- 
rience of the Engliih government. He entered into 
a correfpondence with Spain : He procured thence 
a fupply of arms and ammunition : And having 
united all the Irifh chieftains in a dependence upon 
himfelf, he began to be regarded a$ a formidable 
enemy. " 

The native Irilh were fo poor, that their country 
afforded few other commodities than cattle and oat- 
meal, v.hich were eafily concealed or driven away 
on the approach of the enemy ; and as Elizabeth 
was averfe to the expence requifite for fupporting 
her armies, the Englifh found much difficulty in 
pufliing their advantages, and in purfuing the rebels 
into the bogs, woods, and other faftneffes, to which 
they retreated. Thefe motives rendered fir John 
Norris, who commanded the Englifli army, the 
more willing to hearken to any propofals of truce or 
accommodation made him by Tyrone ; and after 
the war was fpun out by thefe artifices for fome 
years, that gallant Englilhman, finding that he had 
been deceived by treacherous promifes, and that he 
had performed nothing worthy of his ancient repu- 
tation, was feized with a languishing diflemper, and 
died of vexation and dilcontent. Sir Henry Bagnal, 
who fucceeded him in the command, was ilill more 
unfortunate. As he advanced to relieve the fort of 
Black-water, befieged by the rebels, he was fur- 
rounded in difadvantageous ground ; his foldiers, 
difcouraged by part of their powder's accidentally 
- - taking 



ELIZABETH. ' 403 

taking fire, were put to flight ; and though the chap. 
purfuit was flopped by Montacute, who commanded ^^^Z^ 
the Engliih horfe, fifteen hundred men, together ,^<^j. 
with the general himfelf, were left dead upon the 
fpot. This vidtory, fo unufual to the Irifh, roufed 
their courage, fupplied them with arms and ammu- 
nition, and raifed the reputation of Tyrone, who. 
alTumed the character of the deliverer of his court* 
try, and patron of Irifh liberty'. 

The Englifh council were now fenfible, that 
the rebellion of Ireland was cottie to a dangerous 
head, and that the former temporifmg arts of grant- 
ing truces and pacifications to the rebels, and of 
allowing them to purchafe pardons by refigning 
part of the plunder acquired during their infurrec- 
tion, ferved only to encourage the fpirit of mutiny 
and diforder among them. It was therefore refolved 
to pufh the war by more vigorous meafures ; and 
the queen caft her eye on Charles Blount, lord 
Mountjoy, as a man who, though hitherto lefs ac- 
cuftomed to arms than to books and literature, was 
endowed, fhe thought, with talents equal to the un- 
dertaking. But the young earl of ElTex, ambitious 
of fame, and defirous of obtaining this government 
for himfelf, oppofed the choice of Mountjoy; and 
reprefented the neceflity of appointing for that im- 
portant employment fome pcrfon more experienced 
in war than this nobleman, more praftifed in bufi^ 
nefs, and of higher quality and reputation. By this 
defcription, he was underftood to mean himfelf ; 
and no fooner was his defire known, than his ene- 
mies, even more zealoufly than his friends, confpired 
to gratify his wifhes. Many of his fi-iends thought 
that he never ought to confent, except for a fhort 
timcj 'to accept of any employment which muft re- 
move him from court, and prevent him from cul- 

.: '.Cox, p. 4.15. ' Bacon, vol. ir, p. jTi. 

D d 2 tivatin^ 



4d4 HISTORY OF ENGI.AND. 

CHAP, tivating that perfonal inclination which the queen fp 
y^^^' vifibly bore hiiji •'. His enemies hoped, that if by 
J. _ his abfence (lie had once leifure to forget the charms 
. of his perfon and converfation, his impatient and 
lofty derneanor would foon difguft a princefs who 
ufually exafted fuch profound fubmilfion and im- 
plicit obedience from all her feryants. But ^ex 
was incapable of entering into fuch captious 
views ; and even Elizabeth, who was extremely de- 
firous of fubduing the Irifh rebels, and who "vy^as 
Effes ftnt ip^ch prepoifefTed in favour of Effex's genius, res- 
over to dily agreed to appoint him governor of Ireland, by 
re and. ^j^^ ^^^ ^^ |^j.^ lieutenant. The more jto encou- 
rage him in h^s undertaking, fhe granted hiuii by 
his patejQt more extenfive authority than had ever 
before been conferred on any lieutenant ; the power 
of carrying on or finilhing the war as he p^leafed, of 
pardoning the rebels, and of filling all the mofb 
confiderable employments of the kingdom ''. And 
to enfure him of fuccefs, {he levied a numerous 
army of fixteen thoufand foot, and thirteen hundred 
horfe, which fhe afterwards augmented to twenty 
thojjfand foot and two thoufand horfe j, A force 
which, it was apprehended, would be able in one 
campaign to overwhelm the rebels, and make an 
entire conqueft of Ireland. Nor did Efle^'s ene- 
mies, the earl of Nottingham, fir Robert Cecil, fir 
Walter Raleigh, and lord Cobham, throw any ob- 
jUacles in the way of thefe preparations ; but hope<| 
that the higher the queen's expectations of fuccefs 
were raifed, the more difficult it would be for the 
event to correfpond to them. In a like view, they 
rather feconded than oppofed thofe exalted enco- 
miums, which Elfex's numerous and fanguine friends 
difperfed, of his high genius, of his elegant endow- 
?jientSj his heroic courage, his unbounded generpfity^ 

* Cabala, p. 79, X Rymer, torn. xvi. p. 166, 

14 »n4 



ijj)9« 



ELIZABETH, 40^ 

and his noble biith ; nor wete they difpleafed to C H A p. 
obferve that pallionate fondnefs which the people ^^^J|^ 
cVery where expreffed for this nobleman. Thefe 
artful politicians had ftudied his charafter ; and 
finding that his open and undaunted fpirit, if taught 
temper and referve from oppofition, mull become 
invincible, they refolved rather to give full breath 
to thofe fails which were already too much expanded, 
and to pufh him upon dangers of which he feemed 
to make fuch fmall account *. And the better to 
make advantage of his indifcretions, fpies were fet 
upon all his adions and even exprellions ; and his 
vehement fpirit, which, while he was in the midft 
of the court and environed by his rivals, was unac- 
quainted with difguife, could not fail, after lie: 
thought himfelf furrounded by none but friends,: to- 
give a pretence for malignant fufpicions and -^con-i 
iirudions. - .. 

Essex left London In the month of March, at- 
tended with the acclamations of the populace; and 
what did him more honour, accompanied by a nu-" 
merous train of nobility and gentry, who, from 
affe^lion to his perfon, had attached themfelves to^ 
his fortunes, and fought fame and military expe- 
rience under fo renowned a commander. The firll 
aft of authority which he exercifed after his arrival' 
in Ireland, was an indifcretion, but of the generous! 
kind ; and in both thefe refpecls fuitable to his cha-"- 
ratter. He appointed his intimate friend, the earl 
of Southampton, general of the horfe ; a nobleman 
who had incurred the queen's difpleafure, by fecretly 
marrying without her confent, and whom (he had" 
therefore enjoined Effex not to employ in any com- 
mahd under him. She no fooner heard of this inftance 
of difdbedience, than (he reprimanded him, and or-:^ 
dered him to recal his "commifTion to Southampton. 

», . y Camden. Ofborne, p. 371, 

D d 3 Bin 



fuccels. 



406 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP. But EfTex, who had imagined that fome reafong 
^/^^^^Z^ which he oppofed to her firft injunftions, had fatif- 
,^5 J, fied her, .had the imprudence to remonftrate againft 
thefe feccnd orders ^ ; and it was not till fhe reite- 
rated her comm^ands, that he could be prevailed on 
to difplace his friend. 
His ill Essex, on his landing at Dublin, deliberated with 

the Irifh council concerning the proper methods of 
carrying on the war againft the rebels ; and here he 
was guilty of a capital error, which was the ruin of 
his enterprife. He had always while in England 
blamed the condud of former commanders, who 
artfully protracled the war, who haraifed their troops 
in fmall enterprifes, and who, by agreeing to truces 
and temporary oacificatioTis with the rebels, had 
given them leilure to recruit their broken forces *. 
In conformity to thefe views, he had ever infifted 
upon leading his forces immediately into Ulfter 
againft Tyrone, the chief enemy ; and his inftruc- 
tions had been drawn agreeably to thei^ his declared 
refolutions. But the Irifli counfellors perfuaded 
him that the feafon was too early ifor the enterprife, 
and that as the morailes in. which the northern 
Irifh ufually flieltered themfelves, would not as yet 
be pafTable to the Erglifli forces, it would be better 
to employ the prefent time in an expedition into 
Munften Their fecret reafon for this advice was, 
that many of them polfefied eftates in that province, 
and were defirous to have the enemy diflodged from 
their neighbourhood ^ : But the fame felfifh fpirit 
which had induced them to give this counfel, made 
them foon after difown it, when they found the bad 
confequences with which it was attended ^ 

Essex obliged all the rebels of Munfter either 
to fubmit or to fly into the neighbouring provinces ; 

* Birch's Memoirs, vol. ii. p. 4.11. 451. a Ibid. p. 4.3T. 

Bacon, vol. iv. p. 512. b iJiich*s Memoirs* vol. ii, p. 448. 

c Winvvood, vol. i. p. 140. 

But 



ELIZABETH. 407 

But as the Irifii, from the greatnefs of the queen's c. n a p. 
preparations, had concluded that flie intended to ^''^^• 
reduce them to total fubjedion, or even utterly to 1^^^^. 
exterminate them, they confidered their defence as 
a common caufe ; and the Englifli forces were no 
fooner withdrawn, than the inhabitants of Munfter 
relapfed into rebellion, and renewed their confede-^ 
racy with their other countrymen. The army, 
meanwhile, by the fatigue of long and tedious 
marches, and by the influence of the climate, was 
become fickly ; and on its return to Dublin, about 
the middle of July, was furprifmgly diminiflied in 
number. The courage of the foldiers was even 
much abated : For though they had prevailed in 
fome lefler enterprifes againfl lord Cahir and others; 
yet had they fometimes met with more flout re- 
fiftance than they expelled from the Irifli, whom 
they were wont to defpife : And as they were raw 
troops and unexperienced, a confiderable body of 
them had been put to flight at the Giins, by an 
inferior number of the enemy. Eflfex was fo en- 
raged at this mifbehaviour, that he cafhiered all the 
officers, and decimated the private men''. But this 
a£t of feverity, though neceflary, had intimidated 
the foldiers, and increafed their averfion to the fer- 
vice. 

The queen was extremely difgufl:ed when fhe 
heard that fo confiderable a part of the feafon was 
confumed in thefe frivolous enterprifes; and was 
ftill more furprifed that EflTex perfevered in the fame 
pratlice which he had fo much condemned in others, 
and which he knew to be fo much contrary to her 
purpofe and intention. That nobleman, in order 
to give his troops leifure to recruit from their fick- 
nefs and fatigue, left the main army in quarters, and 
marched with a fmall body of fifteen hundred men 
into the county of Ophelie againfl the O'Connors, 

<* Cox, p, 4S1, 

D 4 4 aad 




i59y- 



4cS HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

and O'Mores, whom he forced to a fubmifflon i 
But, on his return to Dublm, he found the army fa 
much diminifhed, that he v.rote to the ^^nglifh 
council an account of its condition, and informed 
them, that if he did not immediately receive a re- 
inforcement of two thoufand men, it v'ould be im- 
poilible for him this feafon to attempt any thing 
againft Tyrone. That there might be no pretence 
ii'V farther inactivity, the queen immediately fent 
over the number demanded " ; and Elfex began at 
lad to aflemble his forces for the expedition into UU 
iter. The army was fo averfe to this enterprife, and 
ib terrified with the reputation of Tyrone, that 
many of them couiiterfeited ficknefs, many of them 
deferted ^ ; and Kiicx found, that after leaving the 
ncceflarv 2:arrifons, he could fcarcelv lead four thou- 
land men againfl the rebels. He marched, how- 
ever, with this fmall army ; but was foon fenfibl.e^ 
that in fo advanced a feafon, it would be impoflible 
for him to cffed; any thing againil an enemy who, 
ihough fuperior in number, was determined to avoid 
every decifive adicn. He hcarlvened, therefore, 
to a melfage fent him by Tyrone, who defired a 
conference ; and a place near the two camps wa? 
appointed for that purpofe. The generals met 
without any of their attendants, and a river ran ber 
tween them, into which Tyrone entered to the 
depth of his faddle ; but EiTex (lood on the oppor 
fite bank. After half an hour's conference, where 
Tyrone behaved with great fubmifTion to the lordf 
lieutenant, a cefiation of arms was concluded to the 
firO; of May. renewable from fix weeks to fix weeks ; 
but which might be broken off by either party upoa 
a fortnight's warning '. Eifex alfo received from 
Tyrone propofals for a peace, in which that rebel 
had inferted many unrealonable and exorbitant con- 
ditions : And there appeared afterwards fpme rea- 

' Birch's ?4enioirs, vol. ii. p. 430. Cox, p. 421. 

'" Sydney'? Lttters, vol. Vi, p. jia, 113. if Ibid. p. 1*5. 



ELIZABETH. 4o<> 

fc)ni.l6 fafpecl that he had here commenced a very chap. 
unjuilifiable correipondence with the enemy ". vi^^ilL/ 

-'So unexpe6:ed an iiTiie of an enterprife, the j.^^a. 
greatefl and mofl expenfive that Elizabeth had ever 
undertaken, provoked her extremely againfl Eflex; 
and this difgnft: was much augmented by other cir- 
cuniitances of that nobleman's condu^:. He wrote 
many letters to the queen and council, full of pee- 
vifh and impatient expreffions ; complaining of his 
enemies, lamenting that their calumnies fhouid be 
believed againfl him, and difcovering fymptoms of 
a mind equally haughty and difcontented. She took 
care to inform him of her diifatisfaction ; but com- 
manded him to remain in Ireland till farther or- 
ders. 

Essex heard at once of Elizabeth's anger, and of 
the promotion of his enemy, fir Robert Cecil, to 
the office of mafter of the wards, an office to which 
he himfelf afpired: And ^reading that, if he re- 
mained any longer abfent, the queen would be to- 
tally alienated from him, he haflily embraced a 
reiblution which, he knew, had once Succeeded with 
the earl of Leicefler, the former favourite of Eli- 
zabeth. Leicefter, being informed Vv'hile in the 
Low Countries that his miftrefs was extremely 
difpleafed with his condu6l, difobeyed her orders by 
coming over to England; and having pacified her 
by his prefence, by his apologies, and by his flat- 
tery and infinuation, difappointed all the expecta- 
tions of his enemies '. Effex, therefore, weighing Returns to 
more the fimilarity of circumftances than the differ- England, 
€nce of chara^er between himfelf and Leicefler, 
immediately fet out for England; and making 
fpeedy journies, he arrived at court before any one 
was in the lead apprifed of his intentions ''. 
Though befn^eared with dirt and fweat, he haftcned 

* Winwood, vol. i. p. 307. State Trials. Bacon, Yol. iv, 
j>. 5»4" 5'^S' 537* * Birch's MemoiiJ, vol. ii. p. 451, 

^ Winwood, vol, i. p. 11^, 

up 



1599* 



4IO HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP. Up ftairs to the prefence chamber, thence to the " 
xLlv. pj-jyy chamber; nor flopped till he was in the 
queen's bed-chamber, who was newly rifen, and 
was fitting with her hair about her face. He threw 
himfelf on hi? knees, kified her hand, and had fomc 
private conference with her ; where he was fo gra- 
cioufly received tliatj on his departure, he was heard 
to exprefs great fatisfaclion, and to thank God that 
though he had iuifeied much trouble and many ftorms 
abroad, he four;! a fweet calm at home '. 

But this placability of Elizabeth was merely the 
refult of her furprife, and of the momentary fatis- 
fadlion which fhe felt on the fudden and unexpe6ted 
appearance of her favourite : After fhe had leifure 
for recollection, all his faults recurred to her; and 
fhe thought it neceifary, by fome fevere difcipline, 
to fubdue that haughty imperious fpirit, who, pre- 
fuming on her partiality, had pretended to domineer 
in her councils,' to engrofs all her favour, and to 
aO;, in the mod important affairs, without regard 
Is (Tif- ^^ ^^^ orders and inflruclions. When Effex waited 
giacecJ. on her in the afternoon, he found her extremely al- 
tered in her carriage towards him : She ordered him 
to be confined to his chamber; to be twice exa- 
mined by the council; and though his anfwers were 
calm and fubmiffive, flie committed him to the 
cuflody of lord-keeper Egerton, and held him fe- 
queflered from all company, even from that of his 
countefs, nor was fo much as the intercourfe of let- 
ters permitted between them. Effex dropped many 
expreffions of humxihation and forrow, none of refent- 
ment: He profefl'ed an entire fubmiffion to the 
queen's will : Declared his intention of retiring into 
the country, and of leading thenceforth a private 
life, remote from courts and bufmefs: But though 
he afi'eded to be fo entirely cured of his afpiring 
ambition, the vexation of this difappointment, and 

' Sydney's Letters^ vol. ii. p. 1*7. 

of 



ELIZABETH. 4it 

of the triumph gained by his enemies, preyed upon c H A p. 
his haughty fpirit, and he fell into a diftemper which ^^'-^^• 
feemed to put his life in danger. ^^^^^ 

The queen had always declared to all the world, 
and even to the earl himfelf, that the purpofe of 
her feverity was to correft, not to ruin him " ; and 
•when flie heard of his ficknefs, (he was not a little 
alarmed with his fituation. She ordered eight phy- 
ficians of the beft reputation and experience to con- 
fult of his cafe; and being informed that the iffue 
was much to be apprehended, fhe fent Dr. James 
to him with fome broth, and defired that phyficiaii 
to deliver him a meifage, which fhe probably deem- 
ed of ftill greater virtue, that if fhe thought fuch a 
ftep confident with her honour, fhe would herfjlf 
pay him a vifit. The byftanders, who carefully 
obferved her countenance, remarked that in pro- 
nouncing thefe words, her eyes were fuffufed with 
tears ". 

When the fymptoms of the queen's returning 
affection towards EiTex were known, they gave a 
fenfible alarm to the faction which had declared 
their oppofition to him. Sir Walter Raleigh, in 
particular, the moft violent as well as the moil am- 
bitious of his enemies, was fo afieded with the 
appearance of this fudden revolution, that he was 
feized with ficknefs in his turn; and the queen was 
obliged to apply the fame falve to his wound, and 
to fend him a favourable melTage, expreifmg her 
defire of his recovery **. 

The medicine which the queen adminiflered to ,600. 
thefe afpiring rivals was fuccefsful with both ; and 
EiTex being now allowed the company of his coun- 
tefs, and having entertained more promifmg hopes 
of his future fortunes, was fo much reftored in his 
health, as to be thought pad danger. A behef was 

™ Birch's Memoirs, p. 444., 445. Sydney's Letters, vol. ii. 
P' i96« " Sydney's Letters, vol. ii. p. 151. 

Ibid. p. J39, 

inftiiled 



412 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, inllilled into Elizabeth, that his diflemper had been 
^^^^- entirely counterfeit, in order to move her compaf- 
»fro», ^10^ '' y ^^^ ^^^ relapled into her former rigour againft 
him. He wrote her a letter, and fent her a rich prefent 
on New-year's day, as was ufual with the courtiers 
at that time : She read the letter, but rejeded the 
prefent ^. After fome interval, however, of fe- 
verity,, file allowed him to retire to his own houfe ; 
and though he remained flill under cuftody, and 
was fequefiered from ail compan^^, he was fo grate- 
ful for this mark of lenity, that he fent her a letter 
of thanks on the occafion. " This farther degree 
" of goodnefs,'* faid he, " doth found in my ears- 
*' as if your; majefty fpake thefe words. Die not, 
" EJfex ; fGr-ihflugb I puntfh thine offence^ and httm- 
** hie thee for thy good, yet ivill I one day be ferved 
" again by thee,,. My proftrate foul makes this 
** anfwer : / hope for that bleffed day. And in ex- 
*' pectation of it, all my affli6tions of body and 
*' mind are humbly, patiently, and cheerfully borne 
*' "by me '." The countefs of Efl'ex, daughter of 
fir Francis Walfingham, poflefl'ed, as well as her 
hufband, a refined taftein literature; and the chief 
confolation which ElTex enjoyed during this period 
of anxiety and expectation, confifted in her com- 
pany, and in reading with her thofe inllruclive and 
entertaining authors, which, even during the time 
of his greateft profperity, he had never entirely ne^ 
gl^iSled. 

There were feveral incidents which kept alive 
the ;queen's anger againft EiTex. Every account 
which The received from Ireland, convinced her 
more and more of his mifconducl in that ga- 
vernment, and of the infignificant purpofes to- 
which he had employed fo much force and treafure, 
Tyrone, fo far from being quelled, had thought 
proper, in lefs than three months, to break the 

F Sydney's Letters, vol. if, p. 153,- 9 Ibid. jf. 155* ijC^ 

» JJircb's Meinoift, p. 44 <^. 

truce J 



ELIZABETH. 



4T3 



truoe ; and joining with G'Donnel, and other rebels, chap. 
had over-run ahnofl the whole kingdom. He ^^^1^ 
boafted that he was certiiin of receiving a fupply of ,^^^ 
men, money, and arms from Spain ; He pretended 
to be champion of the cathoHc rehgion : And he 
openly exulted in the prefent of a phoenix plume, 
which the pope, Clement VIII., in order to encou- 
rage him in the profecution of fo good a caufe, had 
confecrated, and had conferred upon him '. The 
queen, that fhe might check his progrefs, returned 
to her former intention of appointing Mountjoy 
lord deputy, and though ihat nobleman, who was 
an intimate friend of EiTex, and defired his return 
to the government of Ireland, did at firfl very ear- 
neftly excufe himfelf on account of his bad ftate 
of health, {he obliged him to accept of the employ- 
ment. Mountjoy found the ifland almoft in a def- 
perate condition ; but being a man of capacity and 
vigour, he was fo little diicouraged, that he imme- 
diately advanced againft Tyrone in Ulfter. He 
penetrated into the heart of that country, the chief 
ieat of the rebels: He fortified Deny and Mount- 
Norris, in order to bridle the Iriih : He chafed 
them from the field, and obliged them to take fhel* 
ter in the woods and moralfes : He employed, with 
equal fuccefs, fir George Carew in Munfter: And 
by thefe promifing enterprifes, he gave new life to 
the queen's authority in that iiland. 

As the companion of Mountjoy 's adminiflration 
with that of Effex contributed to alienate Elizabeth 
from her favourite, Ihe received additional difgufl from 
the partiality of the people, who, prepoffeffed with an 
extravagant idea of Elfex's merit, complained of the 
injuftice done him by his removal from court, and 
by his confinement. Libels were fecretly difperfed 
againft Cecil and Raleigh, and all his enemies: And 
his popularity, which was always great, feemecl 

• CamdcDj p, 617, 

rather 



414 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, rather to be increafed than diminiihed by his mif- 
-^^^^^ fortunes. Elizabeth, in order to juftify to the 
t6oo. public her conduct with regard to him, had"~often 
exprefTed her intentions of having him tried in the 
Star-Chamber for his offences: But her tendernefs 
for him prevailed at laft over her feverity ; and Ihe 
was contented to have him only examined by the 
privy-council. The attorney-general. Coke, opened 
the caufe againfh him, and treated him with the cru- 
elty and iniblence which that great lawyer ufually 
cxercifed againfl the unfortunate. He difplayed in 
the flrongeft colours, all the faults committed by 
Eifex in his adminiftration of Ireland: His making 
Southampton general of the horfe, contrary to the 
queen's injundlions; his deferting the enterprife 
againfl: Tyrone, and marching to Leinfter and 
Munder; his conferring knighthood on too many 
perfons ; his fecret conference with Tyrone ; and 
his fudden return from Ireland, in contempt of her 
majefty's commands. He alfo exaggerated the in-» 
dignity of the conditions which Tyrone had been 
allowed to propofe; odious and abominable condi- 
tions, faid he; a public toleration of an idolatrous 
religion, pardon for himfelf and every traitor in Ire- 
land, and full reftltution of lands and poffeflions to 
all of them \ The folicitor-general, Fleming, in- 
filled upon the wretched fituation in which the 
earl had left that Idngdom; and Francis, fon of fir 
Nicholas Bacon, who had been lord-keeper in the 
beginning of the prefent reign, clpfed the charge with 
difplaying the undutiful exprellions contained in fome 
letters written by the earl. 

Essex, when he came to plead in his own de- 
fence, renounced, with great fubmiffion and humi- 
lity, all pretenfions to an apology"; and declared 
His Tefolution. never, on this or any other occafion, 
to have any contell with his foverelgn. He faid, 

' Biicli's Memoirs, vol. ii. p. 449. 
" Sydney's Lettens, vol. ii. p. •^00. 

^ that, 



ELIZABETH. 415 

that, having fevered himfelf from the world, and chap. 
abjured all fentiments of ambition, he had no fcru- "^^^^^l*. 
pie to confefs every failing or error, into which his ,600. 
youth, folly, or manifold infirmities might have 
betrayed him ; that his inward forrov/ for his ojETences 
againft her majefty was fo profound, that it exceeded 
all his outward croffes and affliftions, nor had he 
any fcruple of fubmitting to a public confeffion of 
whatever fhe had been pleafed to impute to him; 
that in his acknowledgments he retained only orte 
referve, which he never would relinquilh but with 
his life, the aifertion of a loyal and unpolluted heart, 
©f an unfeigned affeclion, of an eanieft deiire ever 
to perform to her majefty the beft fervice which his 
poor abilities would permit; and that if this fenti- 
ment were allowed by the council, he willingly aC- 
quiefced in any condemnation or fentence which 
they could pronounce againft him. This fubmiffion 
was uttered with fo much eloquence, and in fo pa- 
thetic a manner, that it drev/ tears from many of 
the audience ". All the privy-counfeiiors, in giving 
their judgment, made no fcruple of doing the earl 
juftice with regard to the loyalty of his intentions. 
Even Cecil, whom he believed his capital enemy, 
treated him with regard and humanity. And the 
fentence pronounced by the lord-keeper (to which 
the council affented) was in thefe words: " If this 
" caufe," faid he, " had been heard in the Star- 
" Chamber, my fentence muft have been for as 
*' great a fine as ever was fet upon any man's head 
*' in that court, together with perpetual confine- 
" ment in that prifon which belongeth to a man of 
*' his quality, the Tower. But fmce we are now 
" in another place, and in a courfe of favour, my 
^* cenfure is, that the earl of Eifex is not to exe- 
*' cute the office of a counfellor, nor that of earl 

« Sydney's Letteis, vol. ii. p. zoo, 201, 

" marfhal 



4i6 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP. " marfhal of England, nor of mafler of the '6rd* 
^^^^^^\!l, " nance; and to return to his own houfe, there to 
j6oo. ** continue a prifoner till it fliall pleafe her majefly 
** to releafe this and all the reft of his fentence ^*** 
The earl of Cumberland made a flight oppofition t6 
this fentence -, and faid, that if he thought it would 
ftand, he would have required a little more time t6 
deliberate ; that he deemed it fomewhat fevere; and 
that any commander in chief might eaiily incur a 
like penalty. But however, added he, in confi- 
dence of her majefty's mercy, I agree with the reft. 
The earl of Worcefter delivered his opinion in i 
couple of Latin verfes; importing that, where the 
Gods are offended, even misfortunes ought to be 
imputed as crimes, and that accident is no excufe 
for tranfgrellions againft the Divinity. 

Bacon, fo much diftinguiftied afterwards by his 
high offices, and ftill more by his profound genius 
for the fciences, was nearly allied to the Cecil family, 
being nephew to lord Burleigh, and coufin-german 
to the fecretary: But notwithftanding his extraordi- 
nary talents, he had met with fo Httle protection from 
his powerful relations, that he had not yet obtained 
any preferment in the law, which was his profeflion. 
But Effex, who could diftinguiih merit, and who 
pafiionately loved it, had entered into an intimate 
friendfhip with Bacon, had zealoufly attempted, 
though vathout fuccefs, to procure him the office of 
Iblicitor-general; and in order to com.fort his friend 
under the difappointment, had conferred on him a 
prefent of land to the value of eighteen hundred 
pounds ''. The public could ill excufe Bacon*s ap- 
pearance before the council, againft fo munificent a 
benefactor ; though he acted in obedience to the 
cueen*s commands : But fhe was fo well pleafed 



7 Birch's Memoirs, vol. ii. i>. 454- Caradcn, p. 6z6, Ci^f 
* Cabala, p. 78, 



tvlth 



ELIZABETH. 417 

with his behaviouri that (he impofed on him a new chap. 
tafk, of drawing a narrative of that day's proceed- ^J^V^ 
ings, in order to Satisfy the public of the juftice and ^^^^^ 
lenity of her condud. Bacon, who wanted firm- 
nefs of charatler more than humanity, gave to the 
whole traiifaftion the mod favourable turn for EiTex j 
and, in particular, painted out, in elaborate expref- 
fion, the dutiful fubmiffion which that nobleman 
difcovered in the defence that he made for his con- 
duit. When he read the paper to her, fhe fmiled 
at that paffage, and obferved to Bacon, that old 
love, fhe faw, cpuld not eafily be forgotten. He 
replied, that he hoped fhe meant that of herfelf % 

All the woild indeed expelled that Eflex would 
foon be reinftated in his former credit '' ; perhaps, 
as is ufual in reconcilements founded on inclination, 
would acquire an additional afcendant over the 
queen, and after all his difgraces would again ap- 
pear more a favourite than ever. They were eon- 
firmed in this hope when they faw that, though he 
was ftill prohibited from appearing at court % he 
was continued in his office of mafler of horfe, and 
was reflored to his liberty, and that all his friends 
had accefs to him. Eflex himfelf feemed determined 
to perfevere in that condutft which had hitherto 
been fo fuccefsful, and which the queen, by all this 
difcipline, had endeavoured to render habitual to 
him : He wrote to her, that he kiffed her majef}:y's 
hands, and the rod with which flie had corrected 
him ; but that he could never recover his wonted 
cheerfulnefs, till flie deigned to admit him to that 
preience, which had ever been the chief fource of 
his happinefs and enjoyment : And that he had nov/ 
refolved to make amends for his pafl errors, to re- 
tire into a country folitude, and fay with Nebuchad- 
nezzar, " Let my dwelling be with the beafts of 

3 Cahala, p. 83. ^ VVinwood, vol. i. p. 354. 

^ Biioh's Memoirs, vol. ii. p. 462. 

Vol. V. ' E e « the 



4i» HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP. «« the field ; let me eat grafs as an ox, and be wet 
Jj^j^^Zij " ^^^^"^ ^^^ ^^^^ *^^ heaven ; till it (hall pleafe the 
j6oo. *' queen to rcftore me to my underftanding." The 
queen was much pleafed with thefe fentiments, and 
rephed, that fhe heartily wifhed his aftions might 
correfpond with his expreflions ; that he had tried 
her patience a long time, and it was but fitting (he 
Ihould now make fome experiment of his fubmifTion ; 
that her father would never have pardoned fo 
much obftinacy ; but that, if the furnace of afflidion 
produced fuch good eifefts, (he (hould ever after 
have the better opinion of her chemiftry **. 

The earl of Elfex pofTeiTed a monopoly of fweet 
wines ; and as his patent was near expiring, he pa- 
tiently expefted that the queen would renew it, and 
he confidered this event as the critical circumftance 
of his life, which would determine whether he could 
ever hope to be reinftated in credit and authority % 
But Elizabeth, though gracious in her deportment, 
was of a temper fomewhat haughty and fevere ; and 
V being continually furrounded with EiTex's enemies, 

means were found to perfuade her, that his lofty 
fpirit was not yet fufficiently fubdued, and that he 
muft undergo this farther trial, before he could 
again be fafely received into favour. She therefore 
denied his requeil ; and even added, in a contemp- 
tuous ftyle, that an ungovernable beaft muft be 
flinted in his provender ^ 
His in- This rigour, pufhed one flep too far, proved the 

ij-jgues. £^^^Y ruin of this young nobleman, and was the 
fource of infinite forrow and vexation to the queen 
herfelf. Efiex, who had with great difficulty fo long 
fubdued his proud fpirit, and whofe patience was 
now exhaufted, imagining that the queen was en- 
tirely inexorable, burft at once all reftraints of fub- 
midion and of prudence, and determined to feek re- 
lief, by proceeding to the utmoft extremities againft 

^ Camden, p. 628. « Birch's Memoirs, vol. ii. p. 472. 

f Camden, p. 6a8, 

15 his 



ELIZABETH. 419 

his enemies. Even during his greateft favour he c H a p. 
had ever been accuftomed to carry matters with a /^Z^^^lj 
high hand towards his fovereign ; and as this prac- j/ioo. 
tice gratified his own temper, and was fometimes 
fuccel'sful, he had imprudently imagined that it was 
the only proper method of managing her^. But 
being now reduced to defpair, he gave entire reins 
to his violent difpofition, and threw off all appear- 
ance of duty and refpe(5t. Intoxicated with the 
public favour, which he already poiTelTed, he prac- 
tifed anew every art of popularity ; and endeavoured 
to increafe the general good-will by a hofpitable 
manner of hfe, little fuited to his fituation and cir- 
cumftances. His former employments had given 
him great connexions with men of the military pro- 
feffion ; and he now entertained, by additional ca- 
relTes and civilities, a friendfhip with all defperate 
adventurers, whofe attachment he hoped might, in 
his prefent views, prove ferviceable to him. He 
fecretly courted the confidence of the catholics ; but 
his chief trufl lay in the puritans, whom he openly 
careiTed, and whofe manners he feemed to have en- 
tirely adopted. He engaged the moil celebrated 
preachers of that fe6t to refort to EiTex-houfe ; he 
had daily prayers and fermons in his family ; and 
he invited dl the zealots in London to attend thofe 
pious exercifes. Such was the difpofition now be- 
ginning to prevail among the Englifli, that, Inftead 
of feafling and public fpeftacles, the methods an- 
ciently praclifed to gain the populace, nothing fo 
effeftually ingratiated an ambitious leader with the 
public, as thefe fanatical entertainments. And as 
the puritanical preachers frequently inculcated in 
their fermons the do6lrine of refiftance to the civil 
magiftrate, they prepared the minds of their hearers 
for thofe feditious projefts which Eflex was fecretly 
meditating **. 

6 Cabala, p. 79. , 

^ Birch's Mtmoiis, vol. ii, p. 46;!. Camden, p. 630. 

E e 3 BuT^ 



420 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP. But the greatefl: imprudence of this nobleman 
y/^j^^^Zlj proceeded from the opennefs of his temper, by which 
1600. he was ill quahfied to fucceed in fuch difficult and 
dangerous enterprifes. He indulged himfelf in great 
liberties of fpeech, and was even heard to fay of the 
queen, that fhe "was now grown an old woman, and 
was become as crooked in her mind as in her body '. 
Some court ladies, whofe favours EfTex had formerly 
negle(5led, carried her thefe (lories, and incenfed her 
to a high degree againft him. Elizabeth was ever 
remarkably jealous on this head ; and though flie 
was now approaching to her feventieth year, fhe al- 
lowed her courtiers ''and even foreign ambafladors ', 
to compliment her upon her beauty ; nor had all 
her good fenfe been able to cure her of this pre- 
poilerous vanity "". 

There was alfo an expedient employed by ElTex, 
which, if pofTible, was more provoking to the qeeen 
than thofe farcafms on her a'ge and deformity ; and 
that was, his fecret applications to the king of Scots, 
her heir and fuccelfor. That prince had this year 
very narrowly efcaped a dangerous, though ill- 
formed, confpiracy of the earl of Gowry ; and even 
his dehverance was attended with this difagreeable 
circumilance, that the obllinate ecclefiaftics perfifted,^ 
in fpite of the mofl incontellible evidence, to main- 
tain to his face, -.that there had been no fuch con- 
fpiracy. James, haralfed with his turbulent and 
factious fubjefts, call a vdHiful eye to the fucceilion 
of England ; and, in proportion as the queen ad- 
vanced in years, his defire increafed of mounting 
that throne, on which, befides acquiring a great ad- 
dition of power and fplendour, he hoped to govern a 

» Camden, y, 619. Ofboine, p. 397. Sir Walter Raleigh's Pre- 
* ros^iitive ot Parli.mient, p 4.3. 

'' Hircli's Memoirs, vol. ii. p. 44.^, ^'^"i- 

*■ Sydney's Letters, vol. ii. y. 171. 

"» bee nott: [KK] at the end of t!ic volume. 

9 people 



ELIZABETH. 421 

people fo much more tradable and fubmifllve. He c H A P. 
negotiated with all the courts of Europe, in order ^^^I^!,^ 
to cnfure himfelf friends and partifans : He even ,^00, 
neglected not the court of Rome and that of Spain j 
and though he engaged himfelf in no pofitive promife, 
he flattered the catholics with hopes that, in the event 
of his fucceffion, they might expedl fome more li- 
^berty than was at prefent indulged them. Elizabeth 
was the only fovereign in Europe to whom he never 
dared to mention his right of fucceflion : He knew 
thac, though her advanced age might now invite 
her to think of fixing an heir to the crown, fhe 
never could bear the profpect of her own death 
without horror, and was determined fllll to retain 
him, and all other competitors, in an entire depend- 
ence upon her. 

Essex was defcended by females from the royal 
family ; and fome of his fanguine partifans had 
been fo imprudent as to mention his name among 
thofe of other pretenders to the crown ; but the earl 
took care, by means of Henry Lee, whom he fe- 
cretly fent into Scotland, to aflure James, that fo 
far from entertaining fuch ambitious views, he was 
determined to ufe every expedient for extorting an 
immediate declaration in favour of that monarch's 
right of fucceflion. James willingly hearkened to 
this propofal ; but did not approve of the violent 
methods which Eflex intended to employ. EflTex 
had communicated his fcheme to Mountjoy, deputy 
of Ireland ; and as no man ever commanded more 
the cordial affection and attachment of his friends, 
he had even engaged a perfon of that virtue and 
prudence to entertain thoughts of bringing over 
part of his army into England, and of forcing the 
queen to declare the king of Scots her fucceflbr ". 
And fuch was Eflex's impatient ardour, that, though 
James declined this dangerous expedient, he ftill 

" Birch's Memoirs, vol. ii. p. 471. 

E e 3 endea- 



422 HISTORY OF ENGLAND, 

CHAP, endeavoured to perfuade Mountjoy not to defifl from 
^^^f;;^^^ the projeft : But the deputy, who thought that fuch 
' j6oo. violence, though it might be prudent, and even 
juflifiable, when fupported by a fovereign prince, 
next heir to the crown, would be rafh and criminal, 
if attempted by fubjefts, absolutely refufed his con- 
currence. The correfpondence, however, between 
EfTex and the court of Scotland was flill condufted 
with great fecrecy and cordiality ; and that noble- 
man, befides conciliating the favour of James, rer 
prefented all his own adverfaries as enemies to that 
prince's fucceflion, and as men entirely devoted to 
the interefts of Spain, and partifans of the chime- 
rical title of the Infanta. 

The Infanta and the archduke Albert had made 
fome advances to the queen for peace ; and Bou- 
logne, as a neutral town, was chofen for the place 
of conference. Sir Henry Nevil, the Englifh re- 
fident in France, Herbert, Edmondes, and Beale, 
were fent thither as ambaifadors from England, 
a5th May. and negotiated with Zuniga, Carillo, Richardot, and 
Verheiken, minifters of Spain, and the archduke : 
But the conferences were foon broken off by dif- 
putes with regard to the ceremonial. Among the 
European flates England had ever been allowed the 
precedency above Caflile, Arragon, Portugal, and 
the other kingdoms of which the Spanifh monarchy 
was compofed ; and Elizabeth infified, that this an- 
cient right was not loft on account of the junftion 
of thefe ftates, and that that monarchy in its prefent 
fituation, though it furpafled the Enghfh in extent 
as well as in power, could not be compared with it 
in point of antiquity, the only durable and regular 
foundation of precedency among kingdoms as well 
as noble families. That flie might fnew, however, 
a pacific difpofition, fhe was content to yield to an 
equality ; but the Spanifh minifters, as their nation 
had always difputed precedency even with France, 
to which England yielded, would proceed no farther 

in 



ELIZABETH. 423 

m the conference, till their fuperiority of rank were chap. 
acknowledged °. During the preparations for this ^Jlf^^.!^ 
abortive negotiation the earl of Nottingham, the ,600. 
admiral, lord Buckhurfl, treafiirer, and fecretary 
Cecil, had difcovered their inclination to peace ; 
but as the Englifh nation, flufhed with fuccefs, and 
fanguine in their hopes of plunder and conqueft, 
were in general averfe to that meafure, it was eafy 
for a perfon fo popular as Effex to infufe into the 
multitude an opinion, that thefe miniflers had fa- 
crificed the interefts of their country to Spain, and 
would even make no fcruple of receiving a fovereign 
from that hoflile nation. 

But Effex, not conient with thefe arts for decry- 1601. 
Ing his adverfaries, proceeded to concert more vio- 
lent methods of ruining them, chiefly indicated by 
Cuffe, his fecretary, a man of a bold and arrogant 
fpirit, who had acquired a great afcendant over his 
patron. A felect council of malcontents was formed, 
who commonly met at Drury-houfe, and were com- 
pofed of fir Charles Davers, to whom the houfe be- 
longed, the earl of Southampton, fir Ferdinando 
Gorges, fir Chriftopher Blount, fir John Davies, 
and John Littleton ; and Effex, who boafted that 
he had a hundred and twenty barons, knights, and 
gentlemen of note at his devotion, and who trufted - 
ftill more to his authority with the populace, com* 
municated to his affociates thofe fecret defigns with 
which his confidence in fo powerful a party had in- 
fpired him. Among other criminal projects, the 
refult of blind rage and defpair, he deliberated with 
them concerning the method of taking arms ; and 
afked their opinion whether he had belt begin with 
feizing the palace or the Tower, or fet out with 
making himfelf mafter at once of both places. The 
firft enterprife being preferred, a method was con- 
certed for executing it. It was agreed that fir 

* Winwood's Memorials, vol. i. p. i85 — aaC. 

E e 4 Chriftopher 



424 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP. Chriftopher Blount, with a choice detachment, 
^^^^JJ^ fhould poflefs himfelf of the palace gates ; that 
1 60 1. Davies fhould feize the hall, Davers the guard- 
Hisinfur- chamber and prefence-chamber ; and that Effex 
rcaion. fi^ouij Yu{h in from the Meufe, attended by a body 
of his partifans ; fliould entreat the queen, with all 
demonilrations of humility, to remove his enemies ; 
fhould oblige her to alTemble a parliament ; and 
fhould with common confent fettle a new plan of 
government ^. 
7th Feb. While thefe defperate projects were In agitation, 
many reafons of fufpicion were carried to the queen ; 
and fhe fent Robert Sacville, fon of the treafurer, 
to EiTex-houfe, on pretence of a vifit, but in reality 
with a view of difcovering whether there were in. 
that place any unufual concourfe of people, or any 
extraordinary preparations which might threaten an 
infurredion. Soon after Effex received a fummons 
to attend the council, which met at the treafurer's 
houfe ; and while he was mufmg on this circum- 
ftance, and comparing it with the late unexpected 
vifit from Sacville, a private note was conveyed to 
him, by which he was warned to provide for his own 
fafety. He concluded that all his confpiracy was 
difcovered, at leafl fufpefted ; and that the eafiefl 
punifliment which he had reafon to apprehend, was 
a new and more fevere confinement : He therefore 
excufed himfelf to the council on pretence of an 
indifpofition, and he immediately difpatched mef- 
fages to his more intimate confederates, requefting 
their advice and afliflance in the prefent critical 
fituation of his affairs. They deliberated, whether 
they fhould abandon all their projecls, and fly the 
kingdom ; or inflantly feize the palace with the 
force which they could affemble ; or rely upon the 
alfeftions of the citizens, who were generally known 

p Camden, p. 63?. Birch's Memoirs, vol. ii, p. 464.. State Trials. 
Biiron, vol. iv. p. 544, 543, 

to 



ELIZABETH. 



425 



to have a great attachment to the earl. Eflex de- c h a p, 
dared againfl the firft expedient, and prpfeffed him- '^^-'V- 
felf determined to undergo any fate rather than fub- ^^^^^ 
mit to live the hfe of a fugitive. To feize the pa- 
lace feemed impracticable, without more prepara- 
tions ; efpecially as the queen feemed now aware of 
their projects, and, as they heard, had ufed the pre- 
caution of doubling her ordinary guards. There 
remained, therefore, no expedient but that of be- 
taking themfelves to the city ; and, while the pru- ■ 
dence and feafibility of this refolution was under de- 
bate, a perfon arrived, who, as if he had received a 
commiflion for the purpofe, gave them aflurance of 
the affeftions of the Londoners, and affirned, that 
they might fecurely reft any projeft on that founda- 
tion. The popularity of Eflex had chiefly buoyed 
him up in all his vain undertakings ; and he fondly 
imagined, that with no other afliftance than the 
good- will of the multitude, he might overturn Eli- 
zabeth's government, confirmed by time, revered 
for wifdom, fupported by vigour, and concurring 
with the general fentiments of the nation. The 
wild projedl of raifing the city was immediately re- 
folved on ; the execution of it was delayed till next 
day ; and emiifaries were difpatched to all Eflex's 
friends, informing them that Cobham and Raleigh 
had laid fchemes againft his life, and entreating their 
prefence and affiltance. 

Next day there appeared at Eilex-houfe the gtu Feb. 
carls of Southampton and Rutland, the lords Sandys 
and Monteagle, with about three hundred gentle- 
men of good quality and fortune ; and Effex in- 
formed them of the danger to which he pretended 
the machinations of his enemies expofed him. 
To fome he faid, that he would throw himfelf at the 
queen's feet, and crave her juftice and protedibn : 
To others, he boafted of his intereft in the city, 
and affirmed, that whatever might happen, this 

refoiirce 



4i6 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, refource could never fail him. The queen was m- 
XLiv. formed of thefe defigns, by means of intelligence 
i6oi, conveyed J as is fappofed, to Raleigh, by fir Ferdi- 
nando Gorges ; and, having ordered the magiftrates 
of London to keep the citizens in readinefs, fhe 
fent Egerton, lord keeper, to Effex-houfe, with the 
earl of Worcefter, fir William Knolfys, controller, 
and Popham, chief juftice, in order to learn the 
caufe of thefe unufual commotions. They were 
with difficulty admitted through a wicket ; but all 
their fervants were excluded except the purfe- 
bearer. After fome altercation, in which they 
charged Eflex's retainers, upon their allegiance, to 
lay down their arms, and were menaced, in their turn, 
by the angry multitude who fur rounded them, the 
earl, who found that matters werepafl recal, refoived 
to leave them prifoners in his houfe, and to proceed 
to the execution of his former projeft. He fallied 
forth with about two hundred attendants, armed 
only with walking fwords ; and in his paffage to the 
city, was joined by the eari of Bedford and lord 
Cromwel. He cried aloud. For f he queen! for the: 
qzfeen! a phf is laid for my life ; and then proceed- 
ed to the houfe of Smith the IherifF, on whofe aid 
he had great reliance. The citizens flocked about 
him in amazement ; but though he told them that 
England was fold to the Infanta, and exhorted them 
to arm inftantly, otherwife they could not do him 
any fervice, no one fliewed a difpofition to join 
him. The fheriff, on the earPs approach to his 
houfe, ftole out at the back door, and made the beil 
of his way to the mayor. Efiex, meanwhile, ob- 
ferving the coldnefs of the citizens, and hearing 
that he was proclaimed a traitor by the earl of 
Cumberland and lord Burleigh, began to defpair of 
fuccefs, and thought of retreating to his own houfe. 
He found the ftreefs in his paffage bairicadoed and 
guarded by the citizens under the command of fir 



ELIZABETH. ^af 

Jolin Levifon. In his attempt to force his way, C H a \ 
Tracy, a young gentleman to whom he bore great ^/^zl^^ 
friendlhip, was killed with two or three of the Lon- i6o», 
doners ; and the earl himfelf, attended by a fev/ of 
his partifans (for the greater part began fecretly to 
■withdraw themfeives), retired towards the river, and 
taking boat, arrived at Effex-houfe. He there 
found that Gorges, whom he had fent before to ca- 
pitulate with the lord keeper and the other coun- 
iellors, had given all of them their hberty, and had 
gone to court with them. He was now reduced to 
defpair ; and appeared determined, in profecutioii 
>of lord Sandys's advice, to defend himfeif to the 
lafl extremity, and rather to periih, like a brave 
man, vi^ith his fword in his hand, than bafely by the 
• hands of the executioner : But after fome parley, 
and after demanding in vain, firft hoftages, then, 
conditions, from the befiegers, he furrendered at dif- 
cretion ; requefting only civil treatment, and a fair 
and impartial hearing ''. 

The queen, who during all this commotion had 19111 TeK 
behaved with as great tranquillity and fecurity as if *^'^ ^"^'* 
there had only paffed a fray in the ftreets, in which 
fhe was nowife concerned ', foon gave orders for the 
trial of the moft confiderable of the criminals. Ihe 
earls of Effex and Southampton were arraigned be- 
fore a jury of twenty-five peers, where Buckhurfl: 
a£ted as lord fteward. The guilt of the prifoners 
was too apparent to admit of any doubt ; and, be- 
fides the infurreclion known to every body, the 
treafonable conferences at Drury-houfe were proved 
by undoubted evidence. Sir Ferdinando Gorges 
was produced in court : The confefTions of the earl 
of Rutland, of the lords Cromwel, Sandys, and 
Monteagle, of Davers, Blount, and Davies, were 
pnly read to the peers, according to the practice of 

f Camden, p. 635. » iiiich's Memoirs, vol. ii, p. 469. 

that 



4i« HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, that age. EfTex's befl: friends were fcandalifed at 
•^^^^* his affurance in infilling fo pofitively on his inno- 
,60,, cence, and the»goodnefs of his intentions ; and ftill 
more at his vindiftive difpofition, in accufing, with- 
out any appearance of reafon, fecretary Cecil as a 
partifan of the Infanta*s title. The fecretary, who 
had expected this charge, ftepped into the court 
and challenged Eflex to produce his authority, 
which, on examination, was found extremely weak 
and frivolous '. When fentence was pronounced, 
ElTex fpoke like a man who expefted nothing but 
death : But he added, that he fhould be forry if he 
were reprefented to the queen as a perfon that de- 
fpifed her clemency ; though he fhould not, he be- 
lieved, make any cringing fubmiiTions to obtain it. 
Southampton's behaviour was more mild and fub- 
miifive : He entreated the good offices of the peers 
in fo modeft and becoming a raann-r as excited 
compaffion in every one. 

The mofl remarkable circumftance in Eflex's 
trial was Bacon's appearance againft him. He was 
none of the crown lawyers ; fo was not obliged by 
his office to affiil at this trial : Yet did he not fcru- 
ple, in order to obtain the queen's favour, to be 
adive in bereaving of life his friend and patron, 
whofe generofity he had often experienced. He 
compared Elfex's conduft, in pretending to fear the 
attempts of his adverfaries, to that of Pififtratus the 
Athenian, who cut and wounded his own body ; 
and making the people believe that his enemies had 
committed the violence, obtained a guard for his 
perfon, by whofe affiftance he afterwards fubdued 
the liberties of his country. 

After ElTex had paiTed fome days in the foHtude 
and reflections of a prifon, his proud heart was at 
ialt fubdued, not by the fear of death, but by the 

» Bacon, voLiv, p. 530. 

fentipienta 



ELIZABETH. 429 

fentiments of religion ; a principle which he had be- chap. 
fore attempted to make the inilrument of his am- ^J^^^JXly 
bition, but which now took a more hnn hold of ,601. 
his mind, and prevailed over every other motive and 
confi deration. His fpiritual directors perfuaded him, 
that he never could obtain the pardon of heaven, 
unlefs he made a full confeffion of his difloyalty ; 
and he gave in to the council an account of all his 
criminal defigns, as well as of his correfpondence 
with the king of Scots. He fpared not even his 
moft intimate friends, fuch as lord Mountjoy, 
whom he had engaged in thefe confpiracies ; and he 
fought to pacify his prefent remorfe by making fuch 
atonements as, in any other period of his hfe, he 
would have deemed more blameable than thofe at- 
tempts themfelves which were the objeds of his 
penitence '. Sir Harry Nevil, in particular, a man 
of merit, he accufed of a correfpondence with the 
confpirators ; though it appears that this gentleman 
had never aiTented to the propofals made him, and 
was no farther criminal than in not revealing the 
earl's treafon ; an office to which every man of ho- 
nour naturally bears the ftrongefl reluftance ". Ne- 
vil was thrown into prifon, and underwent a fevere 
perfecution : But, as the queen found Mountjoy an 
able and fuccefsful commander, fhe continued him 
in his government, and facrificed her refentment 
to the public fervice. 

Elizabeth affeded extremely the praife of cle- 
mency ; and in every great example which fhe had 
made during her reign, fhe had always appeared 
full of reluctance and hefitation : But the prefent 
fituation of Eflex called forth all her tender affec- 
tions, and kept her in the moft real agitation and 
irrefolution. She felt a perpetual combat between 
refentment and inclination, pride and compaffion, 
the care of her own fafety and concern for her fa- 

^ Wiiiwood, vol. i. p. 300, ^ Ibid, vol. i. p. 302. 

vourite j 



43» HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, vourlte ; and her fituation, during this interval, waa 
^^^^- perhaps more an objeft of pity than that to which 
,60,, Eflex himfeif vias reduced. She figned the warrant 
for his execution ; fhe countermanded it ; fhe again 
refolved on his death ; fhe felt a new return of ten- 
dernefs. Eflex*s enemies told her, that he himfeif 
defired to die, and had aiTured her, that fhe could 
never be in fafety while he Hved : It is hkely that 
this proof of penitence and of concern for her would 
produce a contrary effeft to what they intended, and 
would revive all the fond affedion which fhe had fo 
long indulged towards the unhappy prifoner. But 
what chiefly hardened her heart againft him was his 
fuppofed obflinacy in never making, as fhe hourly 
expelled, any application to her for mercy ; and fhe 
finally gave her confent to his execution. He dif- 
covered at his death fymptoms rather of penitence 
and piety than of fear ; and willingly acknowledged 
5th Feb. the juftice of the fentence by which he fuffered. The 
execution was private in the Tower, agreeably to 
his own requefl". He was apprehenfive, he faid, left 
the favour and compafTion of the people would too 
much raife his heart in thofe moments, when hu- 
miliation under the aiflidting hand of Heaven was the 
only proper fentiment which he could indulge*. 
And the queen, no doubt, thought that prudence 
required the removing of fo m.elancholy a fpeftacle 
from the public eye. Sir Walter Raleigh, who 
came to the Tower on purpofe, and who beheld 
EfTex's execution from a window, increafed much 
by this adtion the general hatred under which he al- 
ready laboured : It was thought that his fole inten- 
tion was to feafl his eyes with the death of an ene- 
my ; and no apology which he could make for io 
imgenerous a conduct, could be accepted by the pub- 
lic. The cruelty and animofity with which he urged 
on ElTex's fate, even when Cecil relented'', were 

* Dr. Barlow's fermon on EfTex's execution. Bacon, vol. jv. 
p. <;34-. y Murdin, p. "in, 

ftilt 



And exe 
cution. 



ELIZABETH. 43I 

ftiil regarded as the principles of this unmanly be- c h A p. 
haviour. ^^^Zij 

The earl of EiTex w^s but thirty-four years of j^oi. 
age, when his ralhnefs, imprudence, and violence, 
brought him to this untimely end. We muft here, 
as in many other inftances, lament the inconftancy 
of human nature, that a perfon endowed with fo 
many noble virtues, generofity, fmcerity, friendihip, 
valour, eloquence, and induftry, fhould, in the lat- 
ter period of his life, have given reins to his un- 
governable paffions, and involved not only himfelf 
but many of his friends in utter ruin. The queen's 
tendernefs and paflion for him, as it was the caufe 
of thofe premature honours which he attained, 
feems, on the whole, the chief circumftance which 
brought on his unhappy fate. Confident of her 
partiality towards him, as well as of his own merit, 
he treated her with a haughtinefs which neither her 
love nor her dignity could bear ; and as her amo- 
rous inclinations, in fo advanced an age, would na- 
turally make her appear ridiculous, if not odious, 
in his eyes, he was engaged by an imprudent open- 
nefs, of which he made profelTion, to difcover too 
eafily thofe fentiments to her. The many recon- 
ciliations and returns of affection, of v/hich he had 
ftill made advantage, induced him to venture on 
new provocations, till he pufhed her beyond all 
bounds of patience ; and he forgot, that though the 
fentiments of the v/oman were ever ftrong in her, 
thofe of the fovereign had flill, in the end, appeared 
predominant. 

Some of Eifex's affociates, Cuffe, Davers, Blount, ~ 
Meric, and Davies, were tried and condemned, and 
all of thefe, except Davies, were executed. The 
queen pardoned the refl ; being perfuaded that 
they were drawn in merely from their friendihip to 
that nobleman, and their care of his fafety ; and 
were ignorant of the more criminal part of his in- 

tentioi:i5. 



432 



HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 



CHAP, tentions. Southampton's life was faved with great 
^^f^2!ji difficulty. But he was detained in prifon during the 
1601. remainder of this reign. 

The knig of Scots, apprehenfive left: his corre- 
fpondence with ElTex might have been difcovered, 
and have given offence to Elizabeth, fent the earl 
of Marre and lord Kinlofs as ambaffadors to Eng- 
land, in order to congratulate the queen on her 
efcape from the late infurredion and confpiracy. 
They were alfo ordered to make fecret inquiry 
whether any meafures had been taken by her for 
excluding him from the fucceffion, as well as to 
difcover the inclinations of the chief nobility and 
counfellors, in cafe of the queen's demife % They 
found the difpofitions of men as favourable as they 
could wifh ; and they even entered into a corre- 
fpondence with fecretary Cecil, whofe influence, 
after the fall of Eifex, was now uncontrolled *, and 
who was refolved, by this policy, to acquire in time 
the confidence of the fucceflbr. He knew how- 
jealous Elizabeth ever was of her authority, and he 
therefore carefully concealed from her his attachment 
to James : But he afterwards aflerted, that nothing 
could be more advantageous to her than this cor-, 
refpondence ; becaufe the king of Scots, fecure of 
mounting the throne by his undoubted title, aided 
by thofe connexions with the Engliih miniftry, was 
the lefs likely to give any difturbance to the prefent 
fovereign. He alfo perfuaded that prince to re- 
main in quiet, and patiently to expe£t that time* 
fhould open to him the inheritance of the crown, 
without pufhing his friends on defperate enterprifes, 
which would totally incapacitate them from ferving 
him. James's equity, as well as his natural facility 
of difpofition, eafily inclined him to embrace that 
refolution" ; and in this manner the minds of the 

* Rirch's Memoirs, vol. ii. p, 510. * Ofborrie, p. 615. 

* Spotfwood, p. 4711 471. 

Engliih 



ELIZABETH. 433 

Englifli were filently but univerfally difpofed to C H A P. 
admit, without oppofition, the fucceflion of the vj^ill^ 
Scottifh Hue : The death of Eflex, by putting an i^oi. 
end to fadion, had been rather favourable than 
prejudicial to that great event. 

'i H£ French king, who was little prepoflelfed in 
favour of James, and who, for obvious reafons, 
was averfe tp the union of England and Scotland % 
made his ambaffador drop fome hints to Cecil of 
^ Henry's wiilingnefs to concur in any meafure for 
difappointing the hopes of the Scottiili monarch ; 
but as Cecil fnewed an entire difapprobation of fuch 
fchemes, the court of France took no farther Heps 
in that matter ; and thus, the only foreign power 
which could give much difturbance to James's fuc- 
ceiTion, was induced to acquiefce in it''. Henry French 
made a journey this fummer to Calais ; and the affairs. 
queen hearing of his intentions went to Dover, in 
hopes of having a perfonai interview with a mo- 
narch, whom, of all others, fhe mod loved and 
moft refpefted. The king of France, who felt the 
fame fentiments towards her, would gladly have 
accepted of the propofal ; but as many difficulties 
occurred, it appeared neceiTary to lay afide, by com- 
mon confent, the project of an interview. Eliza- 
beth, however, wrote fucceffively two letters to 
Henry, one by Edmondes, another by fir Robert 
Sydney ; in which Hie expreiTed a defire of confer- 
ring, about a bufmefs of importance, with fome 
minifter in whom that prince repofed entire confi- 
dence. The marquefs of Rofni, the king's favourite 
and prime minifter, came to Dover in difguif'e ; and 
the Memoirs of that able ftatefman contain a full 
account of his conference with EHzabeth. This 
princefs had formed a fcheme for eflablifhing, in 
conjundion with Henry, a new fyflem in Europe, 
and of fixing a durable balance of power, by the 

^ Winwood, vol. i. p. 352. "^ Spotfwood, p. 4.71. 

Vol. V. F f eredion 



I 



434 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

C HAP. ere(5Hon of new ftates on the ruins of the houfe of 
^^^;^^^^ Auflria. She had even the prudence to forefee the 
1601. perils which might enfue from the aggrandifement 
of her ally ; and fhe purpofed to unite all the feven- 
teen provinces of the Low Countries in one Re- 
public, in order to form a perpetual barrier againft 
the dangerous increafe of the French as well as of 
the Spanilh monarchy. Henry had himfelf long 
meditated fuch a project againft the Aultrian family ; 
and Rofni could not forbear expreffing his aftonifh- 
ment, when he found that Elizabeth and his mailer, 
though they had never communicated their fenti- 
ments on this fubjeft, not only had entered into the 
fame general views, but had alfo formed the fame 
plan for their execution. The affairs, how^ever, of 
France were not yet brought to a fituation which 
might enable Henry to begin that great enterprife ; 
and Rofni fatisfied the queen, that it would be 
neceifary to poftpone for fome years their united 
attack on the houfe of Auflria. He departed, filled 
with jufl admiration at the folidity of Elizabeth's 
judgment, and the greatnefs of her mind ; and he 
owns, that (he was entirely worthy of that high re- 
putation which fhe enjoyed in Europe. 

The queen's magnanimity in forming fuch ex- 
teniive projects was the more remarkable, as, be- 
fides her having fallen fo far into the decline of life, 
the affairs of Ireland, though conduced with abi- 
lities and fuccefs, were flill in diforder, and made a 
great diverfion of her forces. The expence, in- 
curred by this war, lay heavy upon her narrow 
revenues ; and her miniflers, taking advantage of 
her difpofition to frugality, propofed to her an 
expedient of faving, which, though fhe at firft dif- 
approved of it, fhe was at lafl induced to embrace. 
It was reprefented to her, that the great fums of 
money remitted to Ireland for the pay of the 
Englilh forces, came, by the neceffary courfe of 
circulation^ into the hands of the rebels, and ena- 
bled 



ELIZABETH. 



43: 



bled them to buy abroad all neceflary fupplies of c h a p. 
arms and ammunition, which, from the extreme ^'-^V- 
poverty of that kingdom, and its want of every ufe- ,60,^ 
ful commodity, they could not otherwife find means 
to purchafe. It was therefore recommended to her, 
that {he fhoiild pay her forces in bafe money ; and 
it was aiferted, that, befides the great faving to the 
revenue, this fpecies of coin could never be ex- 
ported with advantage, and would not pafs in any 
foreign market. Some of her wifer counfellors 
maintained, that if the pay of the foldiers were raifed 
in proportion, the Irifli rebels would necefiarily 
reap the fame benefit from the bafe money, which 
would always be taken at a rate fuitable to its va- 
lue ; if the pay were not raifed, there would be 
danger of a mutiny among the troops, who, what- 
ever names might be affixed to the pieces of metal, 
would foon find from experi^ice, that they were 
defrauded in their income % But Elizabeth, though 
{he juflly valued herfelf on fixing the flandard of 
the Englifh coin, much debafed by her predeceffors, 
and had innovated very little in that delicate article, 
was feduced by the fpecious arguments , employed 
by the treafurer on this occafion ; and fhe coined a 
great quantity of bafe money, which he made ufe 
of in the pay of her forces in Ireland ^ 

MouNTjoY, the deputy, was a man of abilities; Moimt- 
and forefeeing the danger of matiny among the joy's fuc- 
troops, he led them inftantly into the field, and re- "^j'" ^'^' 
folved, by means of ftricl difcipline, and By keep- 
ing them employed againft the enemy, to obviate 
thofe inconveniences which were juftly to be appre- 
hended. He made military roads, and built a for- 
trefs at Moghery ; he drove the Mac-Genifes out 
of Lecale ; he haraffed Tyrone in Ulfter with in- 
roads and lelTer expeditions ; and by deftroying 
every where, and during all feafons, the provifions 

* Camden, p. 643, f Rymer, torn. xvi. p. 4.14. 

F f 2 of 



43<5 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, of the Irifh, he reduced them to perifli by famine 
^^^^f^^^ in the woods and morafles, to which they were 
1601. obHged to retreat. At the fame time, fir Henry 
Docwray, who commanded another body of troops, 
took the caftle of Derry, and put garrifons into 
Newton and Ainogh ; and having feized the mona- 
flery of Donnegal near Bahfliannon, he threv/ 
troops into it, and defended it againft the aifaults 
of O-'Donnei and the Irifh. Nor was fir George 
Carew idle in the province of Munfter. He feized 
the titular earl of Defmond, and fent him over, 
with Florence Macarty, another chieftain, prifoner 
to England. He arrefted many fufpefted perfons, 
and took hoftages from others. And having got a 
reinforcement of two thoufand men from England, 
he threw himfelf into Corke, which he fupplied 
with arms and provifions ; and he put every thing 
in a condition for refifling the Spanilh invafion, 
which was daily expected. The deputy, informed 
of the danger to which the fouthern provinces were 
expofed, left the profecution of the war againfl: Ty- 
rone, who was reduced to great extremities 5 and 
he marched with his army into Munfler. 
«3(3 Sept. At lafl the Spaniards, under don John d'Aquila, 
arrived at Kinl'ale ; and fir Richard Piercy, who 
commanded in the town with a fniall garrifon of a 
hundred and fifty men, found himfelf obliged to 
abandon it on their appearance. Thefe invaders 
amounted to four thoufand men, and the Irifh dif- 
covered a ftrong propenfity to join them, in order 
to free themfelves from the Englifh government, 
with which they were extremely diicontented. One 
chief ground of their complaint was the introduc- 
tion of trials by jury ^ ; an inflitution abhorred by 
that people, though nothing contributes more to 
the fupport of that equity and liberty, for, which 
the Englifh laws are fo juflly celebrated. The Irilh 

8 CamdeDj p. 644-. 

alfo 



ELIZABETH. 437 

alfo bore a great favour to the Spaniards, having c h a ?. 
entertained the opinion that they themfelves were (^f^^L* 
defcended from that nation ; and their attachment to j^oi. 
the catholic rehgion proved a new caufe of aifedion 
to the invaders. D'Aquila alfumed the title of ge- 
neral hi the holy war for the prefervation of the faith 
in Ireland ; and he endeavoured to perfuade the 
people that Elizabeth was, by feveral bulls of the 
pope, deprived of her crown ; that her fubje£ls were 
ablolved from their oaths of allegiance ; and that 
the Spaniards were come to deliver the Irifli from 
the dominion of the devil *". Mounjoy found it 
neceifary to ad with vigour, in order to prevent a 
total infurreclion of the Irifh ; and having colleded 
his forces, he formed the fiege of Kinfale by land ; 
w^hile fir Richard Levifon, with a fmall fquadron, 
blockaded it by fea. He had no fooner begun his 
operations, than he heard of the arrival of another 
body of two thouland Spaniards under the com- 
mand of Alphonfo Ocampo, who had taken pof- 
feifion of Baltimore and Berehaven ; and he was 
obliged to detach fir George Carew' to oppofe their 
progrefs. Tyrone, meanwhile, with Randal, Mac- 
Surley, TIrel baron of Kelly, and other chieftains 
of the Irifli, had joined dcampo with all their forces, 
and were- marching to the rehef of Kinfale. The 
deputy, informed of their defign by intercepted 
letters, made preparations to receive them ; and be- 
ing reinforced by Levifon with fix hundred marines, 
he polled his troops on an advantageous ground, 
which lay on the paflage of the enemy, leaving fome 
cavalry to prevent a Tally from d'Aquila and the 
Spaniili garrifon. When Tyrone, with a detach- 
ment of Irifh and Spaniards, approached, he was 
furprifed to find the Englifh fo well polled, and 
ranged in good order ; and he immediately founded 
a retreat : But the deputy gave orders to purfue 

f* Camden, p. 645, 

F f 3 . him ^ 



438 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, him ; and having thrown thefe advanced troops into 
^^^I^^Zlj diforder, he followed them to the main body, whom 
,6oi. he alfo attacked, and put to flight, with the Daugh- 
ter of twelve hundred men '. Ocampo was taken 
prifoner ; Tyrone fled into Ulfl:er; O'Donnel made 
his efcape into Spain ; and d'Aquila, finding him- 
felf reduced to the greateft difficulties, was obliged 
to capitulate upon fuch terms as the deputy pre- 
fcribed to him : He furrendered Kinfale and Balti- 
more, and agreed to evacuate the kingdom. This 
great blow, joined to other fucceffes, gained by Wil- 
mot, governor of Kerry, and by Roger and Gavin 
Harvey, threw the rebels into difmay, and gave a 
profpect of the final reduftion of Ireland. 

The Irifh war, though fuccefsful, was extremely 
burthenfome on the queen's revenue ; and befides 
the fupplies granted by parliament, which were in- 
deed very fmall, but which they ever regarded as 
mighty conceflions, ihe had been obliged, notwith- 
ilanding her great frugality, to employ other expe- 
dients, fuch as felling the royal demefnes and crown 
jewels "", and exafting loans from the people '; in 
order to fupport this caufe, fo eflTential to the honour 
©aoTj. 27. and interefts of England. The neceflity of her 
affairs obliged her again to fummon a parliament ;* 
and it here appeared, that, though old age was ad- 
vancing faft upon her, though ihe had loft much of 
her popularity by the unfortunate execution of EfTex, 
infomuch that, when fhe appeared in public, fhe 
was not attended with the ufual acclamations "", yet 
the powers of her prerogative, fupported by vigour, 
Itill remained as high and uncontrollable as ever. 

The aftive reign of Elizabeth had enabled many 
perfons to diftinguifli themfelves in civil and mili- 
tary employments ; and the queen, who was not 
able, from her revenue, to give them any reward? 

* Winwood, vol. i. p. 3'>9. '^ D'Ewes, p. 619. 

* IbiU-. * Ibi<l, p. ^. Ofboine, p. 604. 

propor- 



A pari 



ELIZABETH. 439 

proportioned to their fervices, had made ufe of an CHAP. 
expedient which had been employed by her prede- ^^^^Xl* 
ceflbr, but which had never been carried to inch ,^,c,. 
an extreme as under her adminillration. She 
granted her fervants and courtiers patents for mo- 
nopolies ; and thefe patents they fold to others, who 
were thereby enabled to raife commodities to what 
price they pleafed, and who put invincible reflraints 
upon all commerce, induftry, and emulation in 
the arts. It is aftonifhing to confider the number 
and importance of thofe commodities, which were 
thus alligned over to patentees. Currants, fait, 
iron, powder, cards, cali-fkins, fells, pouldavies, 
ox-fhin-bones, train-oil, lifts of cloth, pot-aflies, 
annifeeds, vinegar, fea-coals, fleel, aquavitee, 
brufhes, pots, bottles, faltpetre, lead, accidence, oil, 
calamine-ftone, oil of blubber, glaffes, paper, ftarch» 
tin, fulphur, new drapery, dried pilchards, tranf- 
portation of iron ordnance, of beer, of horn, of 
leather, importation of Spanidi wool, of Irifh yarn: 
Thefe are but a part of the commodities which had 
been appropriated to monopolifts ". When this lift 
was read in the houfe, a member cried. Is not 
bread in the number? Bread! faid every one with 
aftoniftiment : 7'es^ 1 aff'ure you^ replied he, if affairs 
go on at this rate^ we Jhall have bread reduced to a 
monopoly before next parliament''. Thefe mono- 
poliits were fo exorbitant in their demands, that in 
lome places they raifed the price of fait from fix- 
teen-pence a bulhel, to fourteen or fifteen fliillings ''. 
Such high profits naturally begat intruders upon 
their commerce ; and in order to fecure themfelves 
againft encroachments, the patentees were armed 
with high and arbitrary powers from the council, by 
which they were enabled to opprefs the people at 
pleafure, and to exact money from fuch as they 
thought proper to accufe of interfering with their 

" D'Ewes, p. 64.J. 650. 632. *• Ibitl. p. 642, 

f Ibid, p. 64.7. 

F f 4 patent. 



440 

CHAP. 
X IV. 

iboi. 



HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

patent ^. The patentees of faltpetre having the 
power of entering into every houfe, and of com- 
mitting what havoc they pleafed in flables, cellars, 
or wherever they fufpected faltpetre might be ga- 
thered, commonly extorted money from thofe who 
deiired to free themfelves from this damage or 
trouble ^ And while all domeftic intercourfe was 
thus reftrained, left any fcope fhould remain for 
induftry, almoft every fpecies of foreign commerce 
was confined to exclulive companies, who bought 
and fold at any price that they themfelves thought 
proper to offer or exaft. 

These grievances, the moft intolerable for the 
prefent, and the moft pernicious in their confe- 
quences that ever were known in any age, or under 
any government, had been mentioned in the laft 
parliament, and a petition had even been prefented 
to the queen complaining of the patents ; but (he 
ftill perfifted in defending her monopolifts againft 
her people. A bill was now introduced into the" 
lower houfe, abolilliing all thefe monopolies ; and as 
the former application had been unfuccefsful, a law 
was infifted on as the only certain expedient for cor- 
recting thefe abufes. The courtiers, on the other 
hand, maintained that this matter regarded the pre- 
rogative, and that the commons could never hope 
'for fuccefs if they did not make application, in the 
inoft hum.ble and refpeftful manner, to the que^s 
goodnefs and beneiicence. The topics which were 
advanced in the houfe, and which cam.e equally 
from the courtiers and the country gentlemen, and 
were admitted by both, will appear the moft extra- 
ordinary to fuch as are prepoffelTed with an idea of 
the privileges enjoyed by the people during that 
age, and of the liberty pofTeifed under the admini- 
ftration of Elizabeth. It was afferted, that the 
queen inherited both an enlarging and a reftraining 



« D'Ewe$j p. 644. 646. 65». 



f Ibid, p. 653. 

power J 



ELIZABETH. 441 

power ; by her prerogative {he might fet at liberty chap. 
what was reftrained by ftatute or otherwife, and by ,^!J.^ 
her prerogative fhe might reftrain what was other- ,60,, 
wife at hberty ' : That the royal prerogative was not 
to be canvaflTed, nor difputed, nor examined ' j and 
did not even admit of any limitation " : That abfo- 
lute princes, fuch as the fovereigns of England, 
were a fpecies of divinity " : That it was in vain to 
attempt tying the queen's hands b) laws or llatutes ; 
fmce, by means of her difpenfmg power, fhe could 
loofen herfelf at pleafure ^ : And that even if a^ 
claufe fhould be annexed to a ftatute, excluding her 
difpenfmg power, flie could firfl: difpenfe with that 
claufe, and then with the flatute % After all this 
difcourfe, more worthy of a Tuikifh divan than of 
an Engliih houfe of commons, according to our 
prefent idea of this affembly, the queen, who per- 
ceived how odious monopolies had become, and 
what heats were likely to arife, fent for the fpeaker, 
and defired him to acquaint the houfe, that ihe 
would immediately cancel the moil grievous and 
oppreffive of thefe patents \ 

The houfe was ftruck with aflonifhment, and 
admiration, and gratitude, at this extraordinary in- 
Itance of the queen's goodnefs and condefcenfion. 
A member faid, with tears in his eyes, that if a 
fentence of everlafting happinefs had been pro- 
nounced in his favour, he could not have felt more 
joy than that with v/hich he was at prefent over- 
whelmed ^ Another obferved, that this mefl'age 
from the facred perlon of the queen was a kind of 
gofpel or glad-tidings, and ought to be received as 
fuch, and be written in the tablets of their hearts ", 
And it was farther remarked, that in the fame man- 
ner as the Deity would not give his glory to ano- 

* D'Ewes, p. 644. 675, ' Ihid. p. 544. 649. 

8 Ibid. p. 646. 654. X Tbid. p. 649, r Ibid. 

2 Ibid. p. 640. 646. * Seenoie [LL] at the end of tUe 

volume, ^ D'Ewes, p. 654. '^ Ibid. p. 656, 

ther. 



442 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, ther, fo the queen herfelf was the only agent in their 

,^^f;^^ prefent profperity and happinefs ^ 'The houfe 

j6oj. voted. That the ipeaker, with a committee, fhonld 

afk permiflion to wait on her majefty, and return 

thanks to her for her gracious conceilions to her 

people. 

When the fpeaker, with the other members, was 
introduced to the queen, they all flung themfelves 
on their knees ; and remained in that pofture a con- 
fiderable time, till flie thought proper to exprefs her 
defire that they (liould rife \ The fpeaker difplayed 
the gratitude of the commons ; becaufe her facred 
ears were ever open to hear them, and her bleffed 
hands ever ftretched out to relieve them. They 
acknowledged, he faid, in all duty and thankfulneis 
acknowledged, that before they called, her prevent- 
ing grace and all-dej'crvhig goodnefs watched over 
them for their good ; more ready to give than they 
could dehre, much lefs deferve. He remarked, 
that the attribute which was moft proper to God, to 
perform all he promifeth, appertained alfo to her ; 
and that fhe was all truth, all conftancy, and all 
goodnefs. And he concluded with thefe expreilions, 
" Neither do we prelent our thanks in words, or 
" any outward fign, which can be no fufficient re- 
*' tribution for fo great goodnefs ; but in all duty 
*' and thankfulnefs, proftrate at your feet, we pre- 
" ^tni our moft loyal and thankful hearts, even the 
*' laft drop of blood in our hearts, and the lad 
" fpirit of breath in our noftrils, to be poured out, 
" tc be breathed up for your fafety ^'* The queen 

«* D'Ewes, p. 657. 

c V/e It.irn from Hentzner's Tratels, that no one fpoke to queen 
Flizabetli •.vithout kneeling j tliough now and then flie raifed fonie 
with wsving her hand. Nay, wherever fl>e mined her eye, every on« 
ffll on his krees. Her iucccffor firft allowed his courtiers to omit 
this ceremony^ and as he exerted not the power, fo he relinquished 
the appearance of defpotifm. Ev«n vhen queen Elizabeth was »• fent, 
ihofe who covered her table, though perfons of quality, neither ap- 
proached it nor »*lir«d from it without kneeling, a«d that olten three 
times. ^ D'Ewe», p, f 58, 659. 

heard 



ELIZABETH. 



441 



heard very patiently this fpeech, in which flie was CHAP, 
flattered in phrafes appropriated to the Supreme ^^^Z*. 
Being; and (he returned an anfwer full of fuch ex- ,401, 
preffions of tendernefs towards her people, as ought 
to have appeared fulfome after the late inftances of 
rigour which (he had employed, and from which 
nothing but necelTity had made her depart. Thus 
was this critical affair happily terminated ; and 
Elizabeth, by prudently receding, in time, from part 
of her prerogative, maintained her dignity and pre- 
ferved the affedions of her people. 

The commons granted her a fupply quite unpre- 
cedented, of four fubfidies and eight fifteenths ; 
and they were fo dutiful as to vote this fupply be- 
fore they received any fatisfaclion in the bufmefs of 
monopolies, which they juilly confidered as of the 
utmofl importance to the intereft and happinefs of 
the nation. Had they attempted to extort that 
conceiTion by keeping the fupply in fufpenfe ; fo 
haughty was the queen's difpofition, that this ap- 
pearance of conftraint and jealoufy had been fuffi- 
cient to have produced a denial of all their requefts, 
and to have forced her into fome acls of authority 
{till more violent and arbitrary. 

The remaining events of this reign are neither '^*** 
numerous nor important. The queen, finding that 
the Spaniards had involved her in fo much trouble 
by fomenting and aflifting the Irifh rebellion, re- 
folved to give them employment at home ; and 
(he fitted out a fquadron of nine fhips, under fir 
Richard Levifon, admiral, and fir William Monfon, 
vice-admiral, whom (he fent on an expedition to 
the coaft of Spain. The admiral, with part of the 
fquadron, met the galleons loaded with treafure; 
but was not ftrong enough to attack them. The 
vice-admiral alfo fell in with fome rich (liips ; but 
they efcaped for a like reafon : And thefe two brave 
officers, that their expedition might not prove 
J -J. entirely 



444 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, entirely fruitlefs, refolved to attack the harbour of 
^^^^- Cerimbra in Portugal, where they received intelli- 

^"^^^2. gence, a very rich carrack had taken flielter. 
The harbour was guarded by a caftle : There were 
eleven galiies ftationed in it : And the militia of 
the country, to the number, as was believed, of 
twenty thoufand men, Appeared in arms on the 
fhore : Yet, notwithflanding thefe obflacles, and 
others derived from the winds and tides, the Englifh 
iquadron broke into the harbour, difmounted the 
guns of the caftle, funk, or burnt, or put to flight, 
the gallies, and obliged the carrack to furrender ^. 
They brought her home to England, and fhe was 
valued at a million of ducats ^ : A fenfible lofs to 
the Spaniards ; and a fupply ftill more important to 
Elizabeth '. 

The auliirs of Ireland, after the defeat of Ty- 
rone and the expulfion of the Spaniards, haftened 
to a fettlement. Lord Mountjoy divided his army 
into fmall parties, and haralTed the rebels on every 
fide. He built Charlemont, and many other fmall 
forts, which were impregnable to the Iriih, and 
guarded all the important palfes of the country : 
The aftivity of fir Henry Docwray and fir Arthur 
Chichefter permitted no repofe or fecurity to the 
rebels : And many of the chieftains, after fkulking, 
during fome time, in woods and moraifes, fubmit- 
ted to mercy, and received fuch conditions as the 
i€o3. deputy was pleafed to impofe upon them. Tyrone 
himfelf made application by Arthur Mac-Baron, 
his brother, to be received upon terms ; but 
Mountjoy would not admit him except he made an 

E Monfon, p. i8i. ^ Camden, p. 647. 

' This year the Spaniards began the fiege ot Oltend, wliicli was 
bravely defended ior five months by lir Francis Vere. The States 
then lelievfd him, by fending a new governor; and on the whole the 
fitge lalttd three years, ar.d is computed to have coit the Jives of a 
hundred thoufand men. 

abfolute 



ELIZABETH. 



445 



f 



abfolute furrender of his life and fortunes to the chap. 
queen's mercy. He appeared before the deputy at ,^^^^0 
Millefont, in a habit and pollure fuitable to his ,603. 
prefent fortune; and after acknowledging his offence Tyrone's 
in the moft humble terms, he was committed to i^'q„'"' " 
cuftody by Mountjoy, who intended to bring him 
over captive into England, to be difpofed of at the 
queen's pleafure. 

But Elizabeth was now incapable of receiving Queen's 
any fatisfadion from this fortunate event : She had fiti^neii, 
fallen into a profound melancholy ; which all the 
advantages of her high fortune, all the glories of 
her profperous reign, were unable in any degree to 
alleviate or affuage. Some afcribed this depreilion 
of mind to her repentance of granting a pardon to 
Tyrone, whom fhe had always refolved to bring to 
condign punifhment for his treafons, but who had 
made fuch interefl with the mlnifters, as to extort a 
remiliion from her. Others, wath more likelihood, 
Recounted for her dejeftion by a difcovery which 
fhe had made of the correfpondence maintained in 
her court with her fucceffor the king of Scots, and 
by the neglect to which, on account of her old age 
and infirmities, fhe imagined herielf to be expofed. 
But there is another caufe afTigned for her melan- 
choly, which has long been rejected by hiftorians as 
romantic, but which late difcoveries feem to have 
confirmed ^ : Some incidents happened which re- 
vived her tendernefs for ElTex, and filled her with 
the deepefl forrow for the confent which fhe had 
unwarily given to his execution. 

The earl of ElTex, after his return from the 
fortunate expedition againfl Cadiz, obferving the 
increafe of the queen's fond attachment towards 
him, took occafion to regret, that the neceflity of 
her fervice required him often to be abfent from her 

^ See the proofs of this reraaikable faft collefled in Birch's Nego* 
tiations. p. zc6. And Menioiis, vol, ii. p. 481, 505, 506, &c. 

perfon. 



44<S HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, perfon, and expofed him to all thofe ill offices> 
^^^^^^J^^ which his enemies, more afliduous in their attend- 
,f,oj. ance, could employ againfl him. She was moved 
with this tender jealoufy ; and making him the pre- 
fent of a ring, defired him to keep that pledge of 
her affection, and allured him, that into whatever 
difgrace he fliould fall, whatever prejudices Ihc 
might be induced to entertain againfl him, yet, if 
he lent her that ring, fiie would immediately upon 
the fight of it recal her former tendernefs, would 
afford him a patient hearing, and would lend a fa- 
vourable ear to his apology. Effex, notwithfland- 
ing all his misfortunes, referved this precious gift 
to the lafl extremity ; but after his trial and con- 
demnation, he refolved to try the experiment, and 
he committed the ring to the countefs of Notting- 
ham, whom he dehred to deliver it to the queen. 
The countefs was prevailed on by her hufband, the 
mortal enemy of Effex, not to execute the com- 
miffion ; and Elizabeth, who ftill expelled that her 
tivourite would make this lad appeal to her tender- 
nefs, and who afcribed the negled: of it to his in- 
vincible obftinacy, was, after much delay and many 
internal combats, puffied by refentment and policy 
to fign the warrant for his execution. The countefs 
of Nottingham falling into ficknefs, and affeded 
with the near approach of death, was feized with 
remorfe for her conduct ; and having obtained a 
vifit from the queen, {he craved her pardon, and 
revealed to her the fatal fecret. The queen, afto- 
niffied with this incident, burft into a furious paflion: 
She ftiook the dying countefs in her bed ; and cry- 
ing to her, That God migbt pardon her, but Jhe never 
could, {he broke from her, and thenceforth refigned 
herfelf over to the deepeft and mo{l incurable melan- 
choly. She rejefted all confolation: She even refufed 
food and fuftenance : And throwing herfelf on the 
floor, {he remained fuUen and immoveable, feeding 
her thoughts on her affli<^ionSj and declaring life 

and 



ELIZABETH. 447 

and exigence an infufferable burthen to her. Few chap. 
words file uttered ; and they were all exprefiive of j]^i;\,!i^ 
fome inward grief, which fhe cared not to reveal : j^^j. 
But fighs and groans were the chief vent which flie 
gave to her defpondency, and which, though they 
difcovered her for rows, w^ere never able to eafe or 
afluage them. Ten days and nights flie lay upon 
the carpet, leaning on culhions which her maids 
brought her ; and her phyficians could not perfnade 
her to allow herfelf to be put to bed, much lefs to 
make trial of any reinedies which they prefcribed to 
her '. Her anxious mind at laft had fo long preyed 
on her frail body, that her end was vifibly ap- 
proaching ; and the council, being aifembled, fent 
the keeper, admiral, and fecretary, to know her 
will with regard to her fucceflbr. She anfwered 
with a faint voice, that as fhe had held a regal 
fceptre, fhe defired no other than a royal fucceffor, 
Cecil requefting her to explain herfelf more parti- 
cularly, fhe fubjoined, that fhe would have a king 
to fucceed her -, and who fhould that be, but her 
neareft kinfman, the king of Scots ? Being then 
advifed by the archbifhop of Canterbury to fix her 
thoughts upon God, fhe replied, that fhe did fo, 
nor did her mind in the lead wander from him. 
Her voice foon after left her ; her fenfes failed ; fhe and death, 
fell into a lethargic flumber, which continued fome 24-thMar.i 
hours ; and flie expired gently, without farther 
ftruggle or convulfion, in the feventieth year of her 
age, and forty-fifth of her reign. 

So dark a cloud overcaft the evening of that day, »"'' <:'»*- 
which had fhone out with a mighty luilre in the "'' ^'^' 
eyes of all Europe. There are few great perfonages 
in hiftory who have been more expofed to the ca- 
lumny of enemies, and the adulation of friends, thau 
queen Elizabeth ; and yet there fcarcely is any 
^hofe reputation has been more certainly deter- 

1 Strype, vol. iv. No, 27$, 

mined 



448 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, mined by the unanimous confent of pofterity. The 
^J^^^ unufual length of her adminiftration, and the. ftrong 
1603. features of her character, were able to overcome all 
prejudices ; and obliging her detractors to abate 
much of their invedives, and her admirers fomcr 
what of their panegyrics, have at laft, in fpite of 
political fadlions, .and, what is more, of religious 
animofities, produced a uniform judgment with re- 
' gard to her conduft. Her vigour, her conftancy, 
her magnanimity, her penetration, vigilance, . ad- 
drefs, are allowed to merit the higheft praifes, and 
appear not to have been furpaifed by any perfon 
that ever filled a throne: A conduft lefs rigorous, 
lefs imperious, more fincere, more indulgent to her 
people, would have been requifite to form a perfetfl 
charader. By the force of her mind, flie con- 
trolled all her more adive and ftronger- qualities, 
and prevented them from running into excefs : 
Her heroifm was exempt from tem.erity, her fru- 
gality from avarice, her friendfhip from partiality, 
her adlive temper from turbulency and a vain am- 
bition : She guarded not herfelf with equal care or 
equal fuccefs from leffer infirmities ; the rivaliliip of 
beauty, the dehre of admiration, the jealoufy of 
love, and the fallies of anger. 

Her fmgular talents for government were founded 
^ equally on her temper and on her capacity. En- 

dowed with a great command over herfelf, ihe foon 
obtained an uncontrolled afcendant over her people; 
and while fhe merited all their efleem by her real 
virtues, (he alio engaged their affeftions by her prcr 
tended ones. Few fovereigns of England fucceeded 
to the throne in more difficult circumltances ; and 
none ever conducted the government with fuch uni- 
form fuccefs and felicity. Though unacquainted 
with the practice of toleration, the true fecret for 
managing religious factions, Ih;^ preferved her peo- 
ple, by her fuperipr prudence, from thofe confufions 
in which theological controverfy had involved all 
II the 



ELIZABETH. ^^^^, 

the neighbouring nations : And though her enemies chap. 
were the mofl: powerful princes of Europe, the mod ^^i^- 
adlive, the mofl: enterprifmg, the leall fcrupulous, j^p^ 
ihe was able by her vigour to make deep impref- 
fions on their dates : Her own greatnefs meanwhile 
remained untouched and unimpaired. 

The wife minifters and brave warriors who flou- 
riflied under her reign, fhare the praife of her fuc- 
cefij ; but inftead of leflening the applaufe due to 
her, they make great addition to it. They owed 
2,11 of them their advancement to her choice ; they 
were fupported by her confliancy ; and with all their 
abilities they were never able to acquire any undue 
afcendant over her. In her family, in her court, in 
her kingdom, fhe remained equally miftrefs : The 
force of the tender paffions was great over her, but 
the force of her mind was ftill fuperior ; and the 
combat which her victory vifibly cofl: her, ferves 
only to difplay the firmnefs of her refolution, and 
the loftinefs of her ambitious fentiments. 

The fame of this princefs, though it has fur- 
mounted the prejudices both of faclion and bigotry 5 
yet lies ftill expofed to another prejudice, which is 
more durable becaufe more natural, and which, ac- 
cording to the different viev»s in which we furvey 
her, is capable either of exalting beyond nieafure, or 
diminifliing the luflre of her cliarad:er. This pre- 
judice is founded on the confideration of her fex. 
V/hen we contemplate her as a woman, we are apt 
to be ftruck with the higheft admiration of her great 
qualities and extenfive capacity ; but we are alfo apt 
to require fome more foftnefs of difpofition, foma 
greater lenity of temper, fome of thofe amiable 
v/eakneffes by which her fex is diltinguifhed. But 
the true method of eflimating her merit, is to lay 
afide all thefe confiderations, and confider her 
merely as a rational being placed in authority, and 
entrufled with the government of niankind. -We 

Vol. V. Gg may 



L 



450, HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

CHAP, may find it difficult to reconcile our fancy to her 
y^^^..^^,^ as a wife or a miftrefs ; but her qualities as a 
J 603. fovereign, though with fome confiderable excep- 
tions, are the objed; of undifputcd applaufe and 
approbation. 



C 45' 3 



APPENDIX III. 



Government of England — < — Re-venues Commerce 

Military force Mamfaclures Learn- 
ing, 

THE party among us who have diftinguiflied Appendix 
themfelves by their adhering to Hberty and i,..^,-.^,.^ 
a popular government, have long indulged their Govem- 
prejudices againft the fucceeding race of princes, by "^''"' °\ 
bellowing unbounded panegyrics on the virtue and " 
wifdom of Elizabeth. They have even been fo ex- 
tremely ignorant of the tranfad:ions of this reign, as 
to extol her, for a quality which, of all others, flie was 
the lead poffelTed of ; a tender regard for the confti- 
tution, and a concern for the liberties and privileges 
of her people. But as it is fcarcely pofTible for the 
prepoiTellions of party to throw a veil much longer 
over facls fo palpable and undeniable, there is dan- 
ger led the public fliould run into the oppofite ex- 
treme, and fliould entertain an averfior. to the 
memory of a princefs who exercifed the royal au- 
thority in a manner fo contrary to all the ideas 
which we at prefent entertain of a legal conflitution. 
But Elizabeth only fupported the prerogatives 
tranfmitted to her by her predecefibrs : She believed 
that her fubjedts were entitled to no more liberty 
than their anceflors had enjoyed : She found that 
they entirely acquiefced in her arbitrary adminiftra- 
tion : And it was not natural for her to find fault 
with a form of government by which flie herfelf 
was inverted with fuch unlimited authority. In the 
particular exertions of power the queflion ought 
G g 2 never 



452 



HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 



Appendix never to be forgotten, W/jat is hejl ? But in the ge- 
neral diflribution of power among the feveral mem- 
bers of a conftitution, there can feldom be admitted 
any other queftion than What is eJJahliJhed ? Few 
examples occur of princes who have willingly re- 
iigned their power : None of thofe who have, with- 
out flruggle and reludance, allowed it to be ex- 
torted from them. If any other rule than efta- 
bhfhed praftice be followed, fadlions and diifenfions 
mud multiply without end : And though many 
conditutions, and none more than the Britifh, have 
been improved even by violent innovations, the 
praife bellowed on thofe patriots to whom the na- 
tion has been indebted for its privileges, ought to 
be given with fome referve, and furely without the 
leaft rancour againfl thofe who adhered to the an- 
cient conftitution '. 

In order to underftand the ancient conftitution 
of England, there is not a period which deferves 
more to be ftudied than the reign of Elizabeth. 
The prerogatives of this princefs were fcarcely ever 
difputed, and ftie therefore employed them without 
fcruple : Her imperious temper, a circumftance in 
which ftie went far beyond her fucceiTors, rendered 
her exertions of power violent and frequent, and 
difcovered the full extent of her authority : The 
great po;»ularity which flie enjoyed proves that ftie 
did not infringe any ejiablijhed liberties of the peo? 
pie : There remains evidence fufficient to afcertain 
the moft noted acts of her adminiftration : And 



' By the ?.nctent conftitution, is here meant that which prevailed 
before the fettlement of oui prilent plan pf liberty. There was a 
more ancient conilitution, \vlieie, though the people ha-1 perhaps Itfs 
liberty than under the Tudors, yet the king had alfo Ids authority; 
The power of the barons was a great check upon hiin, and exercilecl 
with great tyranny over thern. I ut there was Itill -a moie ancient 
foiillitution. viz. that before the figning of the chr.rters, when neither 
the pi'ople npr the barons had any regular piivileges; and the power 
of the government, during the reign of an able prince, was ahnoll 
wholly in the king. 'J he EngliHi coiiititutior> like all others, has 
i>£fn in a iUte of continual fludluaciun. 

though 



APPENDIX irr. 



453 



though that evidence muft be drawn from a fource Appendix 
wide of the ordinary hiflorians, it becomes only the ^^'* 
more authentic on that account, and ferves as a 
flronger proof that her particular exertions of power 
were conceived to be nothing but the ordinary 
courfe of adminiftration, fmce they were not thought 
remarkable enough to be recorded even by contem- 
porary writers. If there was any difference in this 
particular, the people in former reigns feem rather 
to have been more fubmiffive than even during the 
age of Elizabeth "" : It may not here be improper 
to recount fome of the ancient prerogatives of the 
crown, and lay open the fources of that great power 
which the Engliih monarchs formerly enjoyed. 

One of the mofl ancient and molt eftablifhed in- 
ftruments of power was the court of Star-chamber, 
which poffeffed an unlimited difcretionary authority 
of fining, imprlfoning, and inflicting corporal pu- 
nifhment, and whofe jurifdi6lion extended to all forts 
of offences, contempts, and diforders, that lay not 
within reach of the common law. The members 
of this court confifted of the privy council and the 
judges ; men who, all of them, enjoyed their offices 
during pleafure : And when the prince himfelf v/as 
prefent, he was the fole judge, and all the others 
could only interpofe with their advice. There 
needed but this one court in any government to put 
an end to all regular, legal, and exad plans of 
liberty : For who durfl fet himfelf in oppofirfon to 
the crown and miniflry, or afpire to the charafter 
of being a patron of freedom, while expofed to fo 
arbitrary a jurifdiction ? I much queflion whether 

"> In a memorial of the ftate of the realm, drawn by fecretary Cecil, 
inT569, there is ibis paffage : " Then followeih the decay of obe- 
'* dience in civil policy, which being compared with the fearfiilnefa 
*' and reverence of all inferior eitates to their fuperiors in times pa<f, 
•• will attonilh any wife and confiderate perfon, to behold the dei"pe« 
•♦ ration of reformation," Haynes, p. 586, /^gain, p. 58S. 

G g 3 any 



454 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

Appendix any of the abfolute monarchies In Europe contain 
^^^' at prefent fo illegal and defpotic a tribunal. 

The court of High CommifTioii was another ju^ 
rifdi^tion flill more terrible ; both becaufe the crime 
of herefy, of v/hich it took cognizance, was more 
undefinable than any civil oiience, and becaufe its 
methods of inquifitlon, and of adminiftering oaths, 
were more contrary to all the moit fimple ideas of 
juftice and equity. The fines and imprifonments 
impofed by this court were frequent : The depriva- 
tions and fufpenfions of the clergy for non-conform- 
ity were alfo numerous, and comprehended at one 
time the third of all the ecclefiaftics of England ". 
The queen, in a letter to the archbifhop of Canter-* 
bury, faid exprefsly, that flie was refolved, *' That 
" no man Ihould be fuftered to decline, either on 
" the left or on the right hand, from the drawn 
" line limited by authority, and by her laws and 
" mjundions ".'* 

But Martial Law went beyond even thefe two 
courts in a prompt, and arbitrary, and violent me-* 
thod of decifion. Whenever there was any infur- 
reclion or public difcrder, the crown employed, 
martial law ; and it was, during that time, exercifed 
not only over the foldiers, but over the whole peo- 
ple : Any one might be punifhed as a rebel, or an 
aider and abettor of rebellion, whom the provofl- 
martial, or lieutenant of a county, or their deputies, 
pleafed to fufpeft. Lord Bacon fays, that the trial 
at common law, granted to the earl of Effex and 
his fellow^-confpirators," was a fivour ; for that the 
cafe woidd have borne and required the feverity o§ 
martial law''. We have feen inllances of its being 
employed by queen Mary in defence of orthodoxy. 
There remains a letter of queen Elizabeth's to the" 

" Nea!, vol. i. p. 479, c Mnrden, p. 183. 

f Vui, iv. p. 510. 

earl 



APPENDIX III. 455 

earl of SulTex, after the fupprefTion of the northern Appendix 
rebellion, in which flic fharply reproves him be- ^ J^^^j 
eaufe llie had not heard of his having executed any 
criminals by martial law "^ ; though it is probable 
that near eight hundred perfons fuffered, one way or 
other, on account of that flight infurredion. But 
the kings of England did not always limit the exer- 
cife of this law to times of civil war and diforder. 
In 1552, when thei;^ was no rebellion or infurrec- 
tion, king Edward granted a commiffion of martial 
law ; and empowered the commiflioners to execute 
it, as jhould he thought by their difcretions moji necef- 
fary '. Queen Elizabeth too was not fparing in the 
ufe of this law. In 1573, one Peter Burchet, a 
puritan, being perfuaded that it was meritorious to 
kill fuch as oppofed the truth of the gofpel, ran 
into the ftreets, and wounded Hawkins, the famous 
fea-captain, whom he took for Elatton, the queen*s 
favouritci, The queen was fo incenfed, that fhe order- 
ed him to be puniflied inilantly by martial law ; but, 
upon the remonftrance of fome prudent counfellors, 
who told her that this law was ufually confined to 
turbulent times, flie recalled her order, and deli- 
vered over Burchet to the common law '. But fhe 
continued not always fo referved in exerting this 
authority. There remains a proclamation of her's, 
in which fhe orders martial law to be ufed againil all 
fuch as import bulls, or even forbidden books and 
pamphlets from abroad ^ ; and prohibits the quef- 
tioning of the lieutenants, or their deputies, for their 
arbitrary punifhment of fuch offenders, a?iy law or 
Jiatiite to the contrary in anyunfe ngp-juithjlandiiig. 
We have another aft of her's flill more extraordi- 
nary. The ftreets of London v/ere much infefted 
with idle vagabonds and riotous perfons : The lord 

1 MS. of lord Rcyfton's, fiom the Paper Ofn-e. 
"■ Strypc's Ecclei". Menioiis, vol. ii. p. 37}. 458, 9. 
' Caiixlen, p. 446. Strype, vol. ii. p. 288. 
• Strypcj vol. ill. p. 570. 

G g 4 mayor 



45^ 

Appendix 

irr. 



HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

mayor had endeavoured to reprefs this difoTder : 
The Star-chamber had exe*ted its authority, and 
inflicted punifliment on thefe rioters : But the queen, 
finding thofe remedies inefFeftual, revived martiai 
law, and gave fir Thomas Wilford a commifliou 
of provofl martial : " Granting him authority, and 
" commanding him, upon fignification given by 
*^' the jufliees of peace in London, or thd neigh- 
*' bouring counties, of fueh offenders worthy to 
" be fpeedily executed by martial law,, to attach and 
" take the fame perfons, and in the prefence of the 
*' faid juftices, according to juflice of marti-al law, 
" to execute them upon the gallows or gibbet 
" openly, or near to fach place where the faid re- 
" bellious and incorrigible offenders fhall be found 
" to have committed the faid great offences "." 
I fuppofe it would be dificuk to produce an iii- 
ilance of fuch an ad of authority in any place nearer 
than Mufcovy. The patent of high conflable, 
granted to earl Rivers by Edward IV. proves the 
nature of the ofiice. The powers are unHmited, 
perpetual, and remain in force during peace as weli 
as during war and rebellion. The parliament in 
Edward Vlth'^s reign acknowledged the jurifdiftion 
of the conflable and martial's-court to be part of 
the law of the land "'. 

The Star-chamber, and High Commiffion, and 
Court-martial, though arbitrary jurifdiclions, had 
ftill fome pretence of a trial, at leafl of a fentence ; 
bat there was a grrevons puniflunent very generally 
inflided in that age, witliout any other authority 
than the warrant of a fecretary of (late, or of the 
privy council " ; and that was, imprifonment in any 
Jail, and during any time that the minifters fhould 



" Rymer, toI. xvi. p^ij<). «" 7 Ed*/, VI. cap. io. Sf« 

fir John Davis's Qiieftion concerning Impofitions, p. 9. 

^ In 1588, the lonl mayor committed feveral citizens to prifon, 
h.ciufc they iclulctl to pay the loan demanded of them. Murden, 
p. 6.52. 

think 



APPENDIX III. 



457 



think proper. In fufpicious times, all the J-ails Appendix 
tvere full of prifoners of ftate ; and thefe unhappy ^^^* 
vidims of public jealoufy were fometimes thrown 
into dungeons, and loaded with irons, and treated 
in the mofl: cruel manner, without their being able 
to obtain any remedy from law. 

This practice was an indirect way of em.ploying 
tortui-e : But the rack itfelf, though not admitted 
in the ordinary execution of juftice % was frequently 
ufed, upon any fufpicion, by authority of a warrant 
fjom a fecretary or the privy council. Even the 
council in the marches of Wales was empowered, 
by their very commiilion, to make ufe of torture 
v/henever they thought proper "". There cannot be 
a ftronger proof how lightly the rack was em- 
ployed, than the following ftory told by lord Bacon, 
We (hall give it in his own words : " The queen. 
*' was mightily incenfed againft Ha3'-warde, on ac- 
" count of a book he dedicated to lord EiTex, being 
" a ftory of the hrft year of Henry IV. thinking it 
*' a feditious prelude to put into the people's heads 
" boldnefs and fiiftion "" : She faid, (lie had an opi- 
'* nion that there was treafon in it, and afked me, 
" If I could not find any places in it, that might 
*^ be drawn v^thin the cafe of treafon ? Whereto I 
*' anfwered. For treafon, fure I found none ; but 
" for felony very many : And when her majefty 
" haftily alked me, Wherein ? I told her, the au- 
" thor had committed very apparent theft : For he 
. *' had taken moft of the fentences of Cornelius 
" Tacitus, and tranilated them into Englifh, and 
*' put them into his text. And another time when 
" the queen could not be perfuaded that it was his 

y Harrifon, book ii, cliap. Ti. * Haynes, p. 196. See 

farther la f.oderie, vol. i, p. 211. » To our apprehanfion, Hay- 

wardc's hook feeins rather to have a contraiy tend<^ncy. For he has 
there preferved the famous fpeech of the hifliop of Cailifle, which 
contains, in the molt exprefs terms, the doftiine of paffive obedience. 
But quesn Eliaabeth was very difficult to pleale on this head. 

" writing 



4SS HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

Appendix " writing whofe name was to it, but that It had 
^^^j " foine more mifchievous author, and faid, with 
" great indignation, that flie would have him 
" racked to produce his author ; I repHed, Nay^ 
" madam, he is a doctor, never rack his perfon, 
" but rack his ftyle : Let him have pen. Ink, and 
" paper, and help of books, and be enjoined to 
" continue the llory where it breaketh off, and I 
" will undertake, by collating the ftyles, to judge 
" whether he were the author or no ^.'* Thus, 
had it not been for Bacon's humanity, or rather his 
wit, this author, a man of letters, had been put to 
the rack for a moft innocent performance. His 
real offence was, his dedicating a book to that 
munificent patron of the learned, the earl of Effex,, 
at a time when this nobleman lay under her maje- 
(ly's dil'pleafure. 

The queen's menace, of trying and punifliing 
Haywarde for treafon, could eafily have been exe- 
cuted, let his book have been ever fo innocent.- 
While fo many terrors hung over the people, no 
jury durft have acquitted a man, when the court 
was refolved to have him condemned. The prac- 
tice alfo of not confronting witneffes with the 
prifoner, gave the crown lawyers all imaginable 
advantage againft him. And, indeed, there fcarcely 
occtirs an inilance during all thefe reigns, that the 
fovereign or the minifters were ever difappointed in 
the iffue of a profecution. Timid juries, and judges 
who held their offices during pleafure, never failed 
to fecond all the views of the crown. And as the 
practice was anciently connnon, of fming, impri- 
Ibning, or otherwife punifhing the jurors, merely 
at the diicretion of the court, for finding a verdid: 
contrary to the direction of thefe dependent judges ; 
it is obvious, that juries were then no manner of 
fccurity to the liberty of the fubjed. 

^ Cab;iia, p. Si.' 

Tll£ 



APPENDIX III. 459 

The power of prefling both for fea and land Appendix 
fervice, and obliging any perfon to accept of any ^^^' 
office, however mean or unfit for him, was another 
prerogative totally incompatible with freedom. Of- 
borne gives the following account of Elizabeth's 
method of employing this prerogative. " In cafe 
" file found any likely to interrupt her occafions," 
fays he, " fhe did fcafonably prevent him by a 
** chargeable employment abroad, or putting him 
" upon fome fervice at home, which flie knew 
" lead grateful to the people : Contrary to a falfe 
" maxim, fince pradlifed with far worfe fuccefs, by 
'* fuch princes as thought it better hulbandry to 
" buy off enemies than reward friends ^" The 
practice with which Ofborne reproaches the two 
immediate fucceffors of Elizabeth, proceeded partly 
from the extreme difficulty of their fituation, partly 
from the greater lenity of their difpofition. The 
power of preffmg, as may naturally be imagined, 
was often abufed, in other refpefts, by men of in- 
ferior rank ; and officers often exacted money for 
freeing perfons from the fervice *. 

The government of England, during that age, 
however different in other particulars, bore, in this 
rcfpeft, fome refemblance of that of Turkey at 
prefent : The fovereign poffeffed every power ex- 
cept that of impofing taxes : And in both countries 
this limitation, unfupported by other privileges, 
appears rather prejudicial to the people. In Tur- 
key, it obliges the fultan to permit the extortion 
of the baffias and governors of provinces, from 
whom he afterwards fqueezes prefents or takes for- 
feitures : In England, it engaged the queen to 
ered: monopolies, and grant patents for exclufive 
trade : An invention fo pernicious, that had flie 
gone on during a traft of years at her own r^e, 
England, the feat of riches, and arts, and com- 

« Page 39». * Murden, p. i8i. 

merce. 



4^o 

Appendix 
III. 



HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

merce, would have contained at prefent as little 
induftry as Morocco, or the coaft of Barbary. 

We may farther obferve, that this valuable pri- 
vilege, valuable only becaufe it proved afterwards 
the means by which the parliament extorted all their 
other privileges, was very much encroached on in 
an indirect manner during the reign of Elizabeth, 
as well as of her predecelfors. She often exafted 
loans from her people ; an arbitrary and unequal 
kind of impofition, and which individuals felt fe- 
verely : For though the money had been regularly, 
repayed, which was feldom the cafe", it lay in the 
prince's hands without intereft, which was a fenfible 
lofs to the perfons from whom the money was bor- 
rowed ^ 

There remains a propofal made by lord Bur- 
leigh for levying a general loan on the people, equi- 
valent to a fubfidy ° ; a fcheme which would have 
laid the burthen more equally, but which was, in 
different words, a taxation impofed without confent 
of parliament. It is remarkable, that the fcheme 
thus propofed without any vifible neceflity by that 
wife minifter, is the very fame which Henry VIII. 
executed, and which Charles I. enraged by ill ufage 
from his parliament, and reduced to the greateft 
difficulties, put afterwards in praClice, to the great 
difcontent of the nation. 

The demand of benevolence was another inven- 
tion of that age for taxing the people. This prac- 
tice was fo little conceived to be irregular, that the 
commons in 1585 offered the queen a benevolence ; 



•^ Bacon, vol. iv. p. 362. ^ In the fecond of Richan' II. 

it was enacted, Thai in loans, which the ki«ig (hall leqtiiie of his lub- 
jtfis upon letters of privy feal, fucli as have reasonable excuie of not 
lending, may there be received without further lummons, travel, or 
grief. See Cotton's Abridg. p. 170. By this law the king's piero- 
gative of exafling loans was ratified; and what ought to be dctmtd a 
ri'rtjorfli/^excurf, was iliU It ft in his own bie^lt lo Uttejaiine. 

s Hayces, p.. 51S, 515. . 

v.hich 



APPENDIX III. 461 

which fhe very generoufly refufed, as having no oc- Appeodix 
cafion at that time for money \ Queen Mary alfo, ^^^• 
by an order of council, increafed the cuftoms in 
fome branches ; and her fifter imitated the example '. 
There was a fpecies of (hip money impofed at the 
time of the Spanifh invafion: The feveral ports 
were required to equip a certain number of vefleLs 
at their own charge ; and fuch was the alacrity of 
the people for the public defence, that fome of the 
ports, particularly London, fent double the number 
demanded of them ''. When any levies were made 
for Ireland, France, or the Low Countries, the 
queen obliged the counties to levy the foldiers, to 
arm and clothe them, and carry them to the fea- 
ports at their own charge. New-year's gifts were 
at that time expelled from the nobility, and from 
the more confiderable gentry \ 

Purveyance and pre-emption were alfo methods 
of taxation, unequal, arbitrary, and oppreflive. The 
whole kingdom fenfibly felt the burthen of thofe 
impofitions ; and it was regarded as a great privi- 
lege conferred on Oxford and Cambridge, to pro- 
hibit the purveyors from taking any commodities 
within five miles of thefe univerfities. The queen 
victualled her navy by means of this prerogative, 
during the firft years of her reign "". 

Wardship was the mod regular and legal of all 
thefe impofitions by prerogative : Yet was it a great 
badge of ilavery, and oppreflive to all the confider- 
able families. When an eft ate devolved to a fe^ 
male, the fovereign obliged her to marry any one 
he pleafed : Whether the heir were male or female, 
the crown enjoyed the whole profit of the eftate 
during the minority. The giving of a rich ward- 
(hip was a ufual method of rewarding a courtier or 
favourite. 



•> D'Ewe?, p. 494. * Bacon, Vol. Iv. p. 362. 

^ Monion, p. 267. 1 Stiype's Memoirs, volt i, p. 137. 



"Camden, [>. 388. 



The 



4^2 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

Appendix The inventions were endlefs which arbitrary 
^^^' power might employ for the extorting of money, 
while the people imagined that their property was 
fecured by the crown's being debarred from impof- 
ing taxes. Strype has preferved a fpeech of lord 
Burleigh to the queen and council, in which are 
contained fome particulars not a little extraordi- 
nary". Burleigh propofes that Ihe fliould ered a 
court for the correction of all abufes, and fhould 
confer on the commiffioners a general inquifitorial 
power over the whole kingdom. He fets before 
her the example of her wife grandfather Henry VII. 
who, by fuch methods, extremely augmented his 
revenue ; and he recommends that this new court 
fliould proceed, " as well by the direction and 
*' ordinary courfe of the laws, as by virtue of her 
*' majefty's fupreme regiment and abfolutc power^ 
*' fro?n whence law proceeded.'^ In a word, he ex- 
peds from this inftitution greater acceflion to the 
royal treafure than Henry VIII. derived from the 
aboHtion of the abbies, and all the forfeitures of 
ecclefiaflical revenues. This projed of lord Bur- 
'leigh's needs not, I think, any comment. A form 
of government muft be very arbitrary indeed, where 
a wife and good minifter could make fuch a pro^- 
pofal to the fovereign. 

Embargoes on merchandife v/as another engine 
of royal power, by which the Engliih princes were 
able to extort money from the people. We have 
^t<d\\ inftances in the reign of Mary. Elizabeth, 
before her coronation, iii'ued an order to the cuftom- 
houfe, prohibiting]^ the fale of all crimfon filks which 
fliould be imported, till the court v/ere firll fuppHed°, 
She ex^eded, no doubt, a good penny-worth from 
the merchants while they lay under this reftraint. 

Thk parliament pretended to the right of enad:- 
jng laws, as well as of granting fubfidies j but this 

n Annals, vol. iv. p. 234, & Ibq, 
® Stiyi)e, vol, j. J). 27. 

privilege 



APPENDIX III. 463 

privilege was, during that age, ftill more infignifi- Appendix 
cant than the other. Queen EHzabeth exprefsly ^^j^ 
•prohibited them from meddling either with ftate 
matters or ecclefiaftical caufes ; and fhs openly fent 
the members to prifon who dared to tranfgrefs her 
imperial edift in thefe particulars. There paiTed 
few feflions of parliament during her reign where 
there occur not inftances of this arbitrary conduft. 

But the legiflative power of the parliament was a 
mere fallacy ; while the fovereign was univerfally ac- 
knowledged to poffefs a difpenfmg power, by which 
all the laws could be invalidated, and rendered of 
no effeft. Th-e cxercife of this power was alfo an 
indirect method pradifed for erefting monopolies. 
Where the flatutes laid any branch of manufadure 
under reflri^tions, the fovereign, by exempting one 
perfon from the laws, gave him in effeft the mono- 
poly of that commodity''. There was no grievance 
at that time more univerfally complained of than 
the frequent difpenfmg with the penal laws*'. 

But in reality the crown poffeffed the full legif- 
lative power by means of proclamations, which 
might affeft any matter even of the greatefl import- 
ance, and which the Star-chamber took care to fee 
more rigoroully executed than the laws themfelves. 
The motives for thefe proclamations were fome- 
times frivolous and even ridiculous. Queen Eliza- 
beth had taken offence at the fmell of woad ; and 
{he iffued an edift prohibiting any one from culti- 
vating that ufeful plant "■. She was alfo pleafed to 
take offence at the long fwords and high ruffs then 
in fafhion : She fent about her officers to break every 
man's fword, and clip every man's ruff, which was 
beyond ^ certain dimenfion '. This pradice refem- 

P Ryiner, tom.xv. p. 756. D'Ewes, p. 64.5. q Murden, 

p. 325- ■■ Townfend's Journals, p. 250. Stow's Annals, 

' Towjifend's Journals, p. 250. Stovv's Annals. Stiype, vol. ii. 
p. 603. 

I bles 



44^ 



HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 



Appendix blcs the method employed by the great Czar Peter, 
^^^' to make his lubjedls change their garb. 

The queen's prohibition of the prophefyings, or 
the aflcmblies, inflituted for fanatical prayers and 
conferences, was founded on a better reafon ; but 
fhews ftill the unlimited extent of her prerogative. 
Any number of perfons could not meet together 
in order to read the fcriptures, and confer about 
religion, though in ever fo orthodox a manner, 
without her permiffion. 

There were many other branches of prerogative 
incompatible with an exaft or regular enjoyment of 
liberty. None of the nobility could marry without 
permifiion from the fovereign. The queen detained 
the earl of Southampton long in prifon, becaufe he 
privately married the eail of Effex's coufm*. No 
man could travel without the confent of the prince. 
Sir William Evers underwent a fevere perfe(:ution 
becaufe he had prefumed to pay a private vifit to 
the king of Scots '. The fovereign even affumed a 
iupreme and uncontrolled authority over all foreign 
trade ; and neither allowed any perfon to enter or 
depart the kingdom, nor any commodity to be im- 
ported or exported without his confent ". 

The parliament, in the thirteenth of the queen, 
praifed her for not imitating the praftice ufual 
among her predecefibrs, of flopping the courfe of 
juftice by particular warrants'*'. There could not 
pofhbly be a greater abufe, nor a ftronger mark of 
arbitrary power ; and the queen in refraining from 
it was very laudable. But (he was by no means 
conftant in this refer ve. There remain in the pub- 
lic records fome warrants of her's for exempting 
particular perfons from all lawfuits and profecu- 
tions '^ ; and thefe warrants, Ihe fays, ihe grants 

s Biich's Memoirs, vol. ii. p. 422. * Ibid. p. 511. 

" Sir Jolii) Davis's Q^etUon conceining Impofitions, pafl'im. 
wp'Ewes, i>. 14.1. ^ Rymer, toiu. xv. p. 6^2, 708. 777, 

from 



APPENDIX IIT: ,^6s 

from her royal prerogative, which flie will not allow Appendix 
to be dhputed. ^^^* 

It was very ufual in queen Elizabeth's reign, and 
probably in all the preceding reigns, for noblemen 
or privy-counfellors to commit to prifon any one 
who had happened to difpleaie them, by fuing for 
his juft debts ; and the unhappy perfon, though he 
gained his caufe in the courts of juilice, was com- 
monly obliged to reiinquifh his property in order to 
obtain his liberty. Some likewife, who had been 
delivered from prifon by the judges, were again 
committed to cuftody in fecret places, without any 
pollibility of obtaining rehef ; and even the officers 
and ferjcants of the courts of law were punilhed for 
executing the writs in favour of thefe perfons. Nay, 
it was ufual to fend for people by purfuivants, a 
kind of harpies, who then attended the orders of 
the council and high commiffion ; and they were 
brought up to London, and conflrained by impri- 
fonment, not only to withdraw their lawful fuits, but 
alfo to pay the purfuivants great fums of money* 
The judge's, in the 34th of the queen, complain to 
her majefty of the frequency of this p^aftice. It is 
probable that fo egregious a tyranny was carried no 
farther down than the reign of Elizabeth ; fmce the 
parliament, who prefented the petition of rights 
found no later inflances of it ^. And even thefe 
very judges of Elizabeth who thus proteft the peo- 
ple againit the tyranny of the great, exprefsly allow, 
that a perfon committed by fpecial command of the 
queen is not bailable* 

It is eafy to imagine that in fuch a government, 
no juftice could by courfe of law be obtained of the 
fovereign, unlefs he were willing to allow it. In the 
naval expedition undertaken by Raleigh and Fro- 
bilher againft the Spaniards in the year 1592, a very 

y Rufhwonli, vol, i, p. 511. Franklyn's Arnals, p, 750, »5i. 

Vol. V, H h rich 



466 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

Appendix rich carrack was taken, worth two hundred thoufand 
^^^' pounds. The queen's fharc in the adventure was 
only a tenth; but as the prize was fo great, and 
exceeded fo much the expeftation of all the adven- 
turers, Ihe was determined not to reft, contented 
with her fhare. Raleigh humbly and earneftly 
begged her to accept of a hundred thoufand pounds 
in iieu of all demands, or rather extortions ; and 
fays, that the prefent which the proprietors were 
willing to make her, of eighty thoufand pounds, 
was the greateft that ever prince received from a 
fubject ^ 

But it is no wonder the queen in her adminiftra- 
tion fliould pay fo little regard to liberty ; while the 
parliament itfelf in enafting laws was entirely ne- 
gligent of it. The perfecuting ftatutes which they 
palled againft papiiis and puritans are extremely 
contrary to the genius of freedom ; and by expofmg 
fuch multitudes to the tyranny of priefts and bigots, 
accuftomed the people to the moft difgraceful fub- 
jedion. Their conferring an unlimited fupremacy 
on the queen, or, what is worfe, acknowledging 
her inherent right to it, was another proof of their 
voluntary fervitude. 

The law of the 23d of her reign, making fedi- 
tious words againH: the queen capital, is alfo a very 
tyrannical ftatute ; and a ufe no lefs tyrannical was 
fometimes made of it. The cafe of IJdal, a puri- 
tanical clergyman, feems fmgular even in thofe ar- 
bitrary times. This man had publiflied a book 
called a Demonftration of Difclpline, in whicli he 
inveighed againft the government of bifliops ; and 
though he had carefully endeavoured to conceal his 
name, he was thrown into prifon upon fufpicion, 
and brought to a trial for thic offence. It was pre- 
tended, that the bilhops were part of the queen's 
political body ; and to fpeak againft them was really 

z Strype, vol, iv. p. 128, 129. 

to 



APPENDIX III. 4^7 

to attack her, and was therefore felony by the fta- Appendix 
tute. This was not the only iniquity to which ^^^" 
Udal was expofed. The judges would not allow the "*'''^'^"*^ 
jury to determine any thing but the fadl, whether 
Udal had written the book or not, without examin- 
ing his intention or the import of the words. In 
order to prove the fa6t, the crown lawyers did not 
produce a fmgle witnefs to the court : They only read 
the teftimony of two perfons abfent, one of whom 
faid, that Udal had told him he was the author ; 
another, that a friend of Udal's had faid fo. They 
would not allow Udal to produce any exculpatory 
evidence ; which they faid was never to be permit- 
ted again the crown % And they tendered him an 
oath, by which he was required to depofe, that he 
was not the author of the book ; and his refufal to 
make that depofition was employed as the flrongefl 
proof of his guilt. It is almofl needlefs to add, 
that notwithftanding thefe multiplied iniquities, a 
verdid of death was given by the jury againfi: Udal : 
For, as the queen was extremely bent upon his 
profecution, it was impoffible he could efcape ^ 
He died in prifon before execution of the fentence. 

The cafe of Penry was, if pofiible, ftill harder. 
The man was a zealous puritan, or rather a 
Brownift, a fmall fe6t which afterwards increafed, 
and received the name of Independants. He had 
written againft the hierarchy feveral tracts, fuch as 
Martin Marprelate, Thefe s Mariinian^s, and other 
compofitions, full of low fcurrility and petulant fa- 
tire. After concealing himfelf for fome years, he 
was feized ; anJ, as the llatute againft feditious 
words required that the criminal fliould be tried 
within a year after committing the offence, he could 
not be indicled for his printed books. He was 

2 It was never fully eftabli/hed that the prifoner could leg illy pro- 
duce evid-ence agiinlt the crown, till after Tiie Revolution, bee J^lack- 
lione's Commentaries, vol. iv. p. 351. •> State Trials, voj. i. 

p. X4.4.. Stiyp.-, vol. iv. p. zi. Id. Life of Whitgift, p. 34.3. 

H h 2 therefore 



455 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

Appendix therefore tried for fome papers found in his pocket, 
^^f^Lj, as if he had thereby fcattered fedition''. It was 
alfo imputed to him, by the lord keeper. Pucker- 
ing, that in fome of thefe papers, " he had not only 
" acknowledged her maje(ty*s royal power to ejia- 
" hlij}:> laws, ecclefiaftical and civil ; but had avoided 
'' the lifual terms of wakings enading, decreeing, 
" and ordaining laws .• Which imply," fays the 
lord keeper, "a moft abfolute authority ^" Penry, 
for thefe offences, was condemned and executed. 

Thus we have feen, that the inoji abfohte autho- 
rity of the fovereign, to make ufe of the lord keeper's 
expreflion, was eftabHfhed on above twenty branches 
of prerogative, which are now aboliflied, and which 
were, every one of them, totally incompatible with 
the liberty of the fubjecl. But what enfured more 
effectually the flavery of the people, than even thefe 
branches of prerogative, was the eftabliflTied princi- 
ples of the timics, which attributed to the prince 
liich an unlimited and indefeizaj)le, power as was fup- 
pofed to be the origin of all law, and could be cir- 
cumfcribed by none. The homilies publifhed for ' 
the ufe of the clergy, and which they were enjoined 
to read every Sunday in all the churches, inculcate 
every where a blind and unlimited pafTive obedi* 
ence to the prince, which, on no account, and under 
no pretence, it is ever lawful for fubje^ts in the 
fmallefl article to depart from or infringe. Much 
noife has been made becaufe fome court chaplains 
during the fucceeding reigns were permitted ta 
preach fuch dodrines ; but there is a great differ-^ 
ence between thefe fermons and difcourfes publifhed 
by authority, avowed by the prince and council, and 
promulgated to the whole na'aon% So thoroughly 
were thefe principles imbibed by the people, during^ 

■«. Stripe's Life of Whitgift, book iv. chap. ii. Neal, vol.i. p. 564. 

'* Snype's A;inals, vol.iv. p. 177. '^ GilFord, a clergy- 

man, was fufpended in the year 1584., for preaching op a limited 
©bedience to the civil magiftrate, Neal, vol, i. p. 4,-35. 

' . the' 



APPENDIX IIL 4^9 

•the reigns of Elizabeth and her predeceffor^, that Appendix 
iDppofition to them was regarded as the moft flagrant ' 

fedition, and was not even rewarded by that public 
praife and approbation which can alone fupport 
men under fuch dangers and difnculties as attend 
the refiftance of tyrannical authority ^ It was only 
during the next generation that the noble principle:, 
of liberty took root, and fpreading themfelves under 
the flicker of puritanical abfurdities, became falhion- 
able among the people. 

It is worth remarking, that the advantage ufu- 
ally afcribed to abfolute monarchy, a greater regu- 
larity of police, and a more ftrid execuilon of the 
laws, did not attend the former Engliili govern- 
ment, though in many refpefts it fell under that 
denomination. A demonflration of this truth is 
contained in a judicious paper which is preferved by 
Strype^, and which was vmtten by an eminent juf- 
tice of peace of Somerfetfliire, in the year 1596, 
near the end of the queen's reign ; when the autho- 
rity of that princefs may be fuppofed to be fully 
corroborated by time, and her maxims of govern- 
ment improved by long pradice. This paper con- 
tains an account of the diforders which then prevailed 
in the county of Somerfet. The author fays, that 
forty perfons had there been executed in a year for 
robberies, thefts, and other felonies ; thirty-five 
burnt in the hand, thirty-feven whipped, one hun- 
dred and eighty-three difcharged : That thofe who 
were difcharged were moit wicked and defperate 

f It is remarkable, that in all the hiftorical plays of Shakefpeare, 
wliere the niamiers and charaflers, and even the tranfaflions of the 
feveral rcigus are Co exad^ly copied, there is fcarcely any mention of 
cii'll Liberty, which fome pretended hiitorians have imagined to be the 
pbject ot all the ancient tjiiarrels, infurreftions, and civil wars. In 
the elaborate panegyric of England, contained in the tragedy of 
Richard II. and the detail of its advantages, not a word of its civil 
conftitution, as anywife different from, or luperior to, that ot other 
European kingdoms : An omiflion which cannot be fnppo(ed in any 
Englilh author that wrote fince the Reltoration, at leaft fince the Re- 
volution. 5 Annals, vol. iv. p. 290. 

^H h 3 perfons. 



47© HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

Appenlix perfon?, wHo never could come to any good, becaufe 
^^^- they would not work, tind none would take them into 
fervice : That, notwithjR:anding this great number 
of indiftments, the fifth part of the felonies com- 
mitted in the county were not brought to a trial ; 
the greater number efcaped cenfure, either from the 
fuperjor cunning of the felons, the remiffnefs of the 
magiftrates, or the foolilh lenity of the people : 
That the rapines committed by the infinite number 
of wicked, wandering, idle people, were intolera- 
ble to the poor countrymen, and obliged them to 
keep a perpetual watch over the flieep folds, their 
paflures, their woods, and their corn-fields : That 
the other counties of Ensrland were in no better 

o 

condition than SomerfetOiire ; and many of them 
were even in a worfe : That there were at leafl three 
or four hundred able-bodied vagabonds in every 
county who Hved by theft and rapine ; and who 
fometimes met in troops to the number of fixty, 
and committed fpoil on the inhabitants : That if 
all the felons of this kind were affembled, they 
would be able, if reduced to good fubjeftion, to 
give the greareil enemy her majefly has a Jiron^ 
battle : And that the magiftrates themfelves were 
intimidated from executing the laws upon them ; 
and there were iniiances of juftices of peace who, 
after giving fentence againft rogues, had inter- 
pofed to ilop the execution of their own fentence, 
on account of the danger which hung over them, 
from the confederates of thefe felons. 

In the year 1575, the queen complained in 
parliament of the bad execution of the laws ; and 
threatened, that if the magiftrates were not for the 
future more vigilant, fhe would entruft authority to 
indigent and needy perfons, who would find an in- 
terefl in a more exad adminiflration of juftice ''. 
Jt appears that /he was as good as her word. For 

•• D'Ewes, p. 234. 

m 



APPENDIX III. 471 

In the year i6oi, there were (rreat compl.dnts Appendix 

made in parliament of the rapii^'-j of juftices of . 1 , 

peace ; and a member fald, that this magiftrate was 
an animal who for half a dozen of chickens would 
difpenfe with a dozen of penal ftatutes '. It is not; 
eafy to account for this relaxation of government 
and negle6l of police during a reign of io much vi- 
gour as that of Elizabeth. The frnall revenue of 
the crown is the mofl likely caufe that can be af- 
figned. The queen had it not in her power to in- 
tercll a great number in afiilting her to execute the 
laws "". 

On the whole, the Englifli have no reafon, from 
the example of their ancellors, to be in love with 
the pidure of abfolute monarchy ; or to prefer the 
unlimited authority of the prince and his unbound- 
ed prerogatives to that noble liberty, that fweet 
equality, and that happy fecurity by which they are 
at prefent diilinguifhed above all nations in the uni- 
verfe. The utmoft that can be faid in favour of 
the government of that age (and perhaps it may be 
faid with truth) is, that the power of the prince, 
though really unlimited, was exercifed after the 
European manner, and entered not into every part 
of the adminiftration ; that the inftances of a high 
exerted prerogative were not fo frequent as to ren- 
der property fenfibly infecure, or reduce the people 
to a total lervitude ; that the freedom from fatlion, 
the quiclaiefs of execution, and the promptitude of 
thofe meafures, which could be taken for oftence or 
defence, made fome compenfation for the want of 
a legal and determinate hberty ; that as the prince 
command rd lio mercenary army, there was a tacit 
check on him, which maintained the government 
in that medium to which the people had been ac- 
cullomed ; and- that this fituation of England, 
though feemingly it approached nearer, was in 

' D'Ewes, p. 661 — 664. 

^ See note [MM] at the end of the volume. 

H h 4 reality 



47? HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

Appendix reality more remote from a defpotic .and eaftern 
,1^^1„^ monarchy than the prefent government of that kingr 
dom, where the people, though guarded by muki- 
phed laws, are totally naked, defenceleis, and dii- 
^rmed ; and befides, are not fecured by an,y middle 
power, or independent powerful nobility, interpofed 
between them and the monarch. 

We fliall clofe the prefent Appendix with a brief 
account of the revenues, the military force, the 
commerce, the arts, and the learning of England 
during this period. 
Kcvenues, QuEEN Ehzabeth's ceconomy was remarkable ; 
and in fome inftances feemed to border on avarice. 
The fmalleft expence, if it could poliibly be fpared, 
appeared confiderable in her eyes ; and even the 
charge of an exprefs during the moft delicate tranfr 
aftions was not below her notice '. She was alfa. 
attentive to every profit ; and embraced opportu- 
nities of gain which may appear fomewhat extra- 
ordinary. She kept, for inftance, the fee of Ely 
vacant nineteen years, in order to retain the reve- 
nue " J and it was ufual with her, when Ihe pro- 
moted a bilhop, to take the opportunity of pillaging 
the fee of fome of its manors ". But that in reality 
there vv^as little or no avarice in the queen's temper, 
appears from this circumftance, that Hiq never 
amaifed any ti'eafure ; and eyen refufed fubfidies 
from the parliament when fhe had no prefent occar 
iion for them. Yet we mull not conclude, from 
this circumflance, that her ceconomy proceedec^ 

1 nirch's Negot. p. 21 ™ Strype, vol. iv. p. 351. 

" Ibid. p. 2i<;. There is a curious letter of the queen's, written 
lo a bifliop of Ely, and prelerved in the regifter of th:it fee. It is in 
thefe Wi.nis: Prcud prelate, 1 under fl and you are imckivard in comply'wg lo'uh 
ytur agreement : but I ivould ba've you kndiv, that I ivho wade you ivbat you art 
tan unmake you ; and if you do not forthwith fufl your engagement, by God I 
^vili imnedii:te:y unfrock you. Tours, as you demean yvarjef, ELIZABETH. 
The biftiop, it Item.-, had piomiied 10 exchnngc fome pait of the 
land beioi'giiig to the fee for a pretended equivalent, and did fo, but 
it was in coniecjuence of the above letter. Annual Krgilter, 1761^ 



p. 15- 



froi^ 



APPENDIX III, 473 

from a tender concern for her people : She loaded Appendix 
ihem with monopolies and exclufive patents, wiiich ^^^ 
are much more oppreflive than the molt heavy 
taxes levied in an equal and regular manner. The 
real fource of her frugal condud was derived from 
her defire of independency, and her care to preferve 
her dignity, which would have been endangered 
had Ihe reduced herfelf to the neceifity of having 
frequent recourfe to parliamentary fupplies. In 
confequence of this motive, the queen, though en- 
gaged in fuccefsful and necelfary wars, thought it 
more prudent to make a continual dilapidation of 
the royal demefnes °, than demand the moil mo- 
derate fupplies from the commons. As Ihe lived 
unmarried, and had no polterity, (he was content 
to lerve her prefent turn, though at the expence of 
her fuccefibrs ; who, by reafon.of this policy, joined 
to other circumftances, found themfelves on a fud- 
den reduced to the mofl extreme indigence. 

The fplendour of a court was, during this age, a 
great part of the public charge ; and as Elizabeth 
was a fmgle woman, and expenfive in no kind of 
magnificence, except clothes, this circumftance en- 
abled her to perform great things by her narrow re- 
venue. She is faid to have paid four millions of 
debt, left on the crown by her father, brother, and 
filter ; an incredible fum for that age ^ The States, 
at the time of her death, owed her about eight 
hundred thoufand pounds : And the king of France 
four hundred and fifty thoufand '^. Though that 
prince was extremely frugal, and after the peace of 
Vervins was continually amafling treafure, the 
queen never could, by the mofl prefhng importu^ 

° Rymer, torn. xvi. p. 141. D'Ewes, p. 151. 457. 525. 629. 
Bacon, vol. iv. p. 363. P D'Ewes, p. 4.73. I think it 

iinpofTible to reconciJe this account of tl-.e piSlic debts wirh that given 
joy Strype, Ecclef. iVIem. vol. ii. p. 34+ that in the ye.ir 1553, the 
frown owed but 300,000 pounds. I own that this lalt luin appears 
a great deal more likely. The whole revenue of queen Elizabetli 
would not in ten years hive paid four millions, 

^ Winvyood, vol. i. p. 29. 54. 

nitieSj 



474 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

Appendix nitles, prevail on him to make payment of thofe 
^^^" Aims which fhe had fo generoufly advanced him 
during his greatefl diftrelTes. One payment of 
twenty thoufand crowns, and another of fifty thou- 
fand, were all fhe could obtain by the itrongefl: re- 
prcfentations ihe could make of the difficulties to 
which the rebellion in Ireland had reduced her'. 
The queen expended on the wars v/ith Spain, be- 
tween the years 1589 and 1595, the fum of one 
million three hundred thoufand pounds, befides the 
pittance of a double fubfidy, amounting to two hun- 
dred and eighty thoufand pounds, granted her by 
parhament". In the year 1599 fhe fpent fix hun- 
dred thoufand pounds in fix months on the fervice 
of Ireland '. Sir Robert Cecil affirmed, that in ten 
years Ireland coft her three millions four hundred 
thoufand pounds ". She gave the earl of Effex a 
prefent of thirty thoufand pounds upon his de- 
parture for the government of that kingdom *. Lord 
Burleigh computed, that the value of the gifts con- 
ferred on that favourite, amounted to three hundred 
thoufand pounds ; a fum which, though probably 
exaggerated, is a pioof of her ftrong affection to- 
wards him ! It was a common faying during this 
reign ; The queen pays bountifully, though Jhe re- 
ivards fpar'mgly ''. 

It is difficult to compute exaftly the queen's 
ordinary revenue, but it certainly fell much fhort 
of five hundred thoufand pounds a-year ^. In the 
year 1590 flie railed the cufloms from fourteen 
thoufand pounds a-year to fifty thoufand, and obli- 
ged fir Thomas Smith, who had farmed them, to 

•■ Winwcod, vol. i. p. x 17. 395. ' D'Ewes, p. 4.83. 

* Criindeti, p. 167, " Appendix to the earl > f Eflex's 

apoIns;y. ■*" Birch's Memoirs, vol. ii. ^ Nai)ton's 

Rfg.ilia, chap, t- 

y Fraokiyn in his Annals, p. 9. fays, that the p>cfir of the king- 
dom, befnies wards and the dmchy of Lancafter (ivt.kb amounted tc 
ahcut 120,006 /cK.'/i/j), W2S 188,197 pounds: The crown lands fcein 
to be comprehended in this computation. 

refund 



APPENDIX III. 475 

refund fome of his former profits ^. This improve- Appendix 
me^t oF the revenue was owing to the fuggeftions ^^^' 
of one Caermarthen ; and was oppofed by Burleigh, 
Leicefrer, and Walfingham : But the queen's pcr- 
feverance overcame all their oppofition. The great 
undertakings which flie executed with fo narrow a 
revenue, and with fuch fmall fupplies from her peo- 
ple, prove the mighty effects of wifdom and oeco- 
nomy. She received from the parliament, during 
the courfe of her whole reign, only twenty fubfidies 
and thirty-nine fifteenths. I pretend not to deter- 
mine exaftly the amount of thefe fupplies ; becaufe 
the value of a fubfidy was continually falling ; and 
in the end of her reign it amounted only to eighty 
thoufand pounds *. If we fuppofe that the fupplies 
granted Elizabeth during a reign of forty-five years 
amounted to three millions, we ihali not probably 
be much wide of the truth ^ This fum makes only 

fixty- 

» Camden, p. 558. This account of Camden is difficult or impoflj- 
hle tube lecunciled to the Itate of the cultoms in the beginning of tiie 
Aibfeqiient reign, as they aj)j>ear in the journals of the commons. 
See Hilt, of James, chap. 4.6. * DEwes, p. 650. 

^ Lord balilbury computed thefe fupplies only at 2,800,000 pounds, 
Journ. 17 Fi-b. 1609. King James wis certainly mil'.aken when he 
eltimated the cjueen's annual iiipplies at 137,000 pounds, Franklyn, 
J). 44. It IS curious to obferve, that the mmilter, in the war be^un 
in 1754, was in Ibme periods allowed u> lavish in two months as great 
a lum as was granted by parliament to queen Elizabeth in forty-five 
years- I he ex.reine friv<(lous ob)c6t of the late war, and the orrear 
importance of hers, fct thi:^ matter m (till a flronger light> Money 
too, we may ohfcrve, was in m^^ft particulars of the fame value in botti 
periods : iShe payed eight pence a tlay to every foot fblJier. But our 
late delufions have much exceeded any thing known in hiftory, noi 
even excepting thofe of the crufadfs. For I lupuofe theie'is no 
mathematical, itill lefs an arithmetical demonltration, that the road 
to the Holy Land was not the road to Paradile, as there is, that the 
eudleis incrcafe of national debts is the direit road to national 
ruin, hut braving now completely reached that goal, it is neediefs at 
prefent to reflect on the palt. It v^iil be found m the prelcnt year, 
1776, that all the revenues of this iiland nortii of Trent and welt of 
Ktading, are mortgaged or anticipared for ever. Could the fmall re- 
mainderbe in a worle condition, were thofe provii.cts feizid by Au- 
ftna and Prufiia ? i here laonly this difference, that foii>e event might 
happen in Europe which would oblige thefe great nionarchs to d\f- 
gorge their acquifitions, But no imagination can fir^ure a fituation 

which 



^76 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

Appendix fixty-fix thGiifand Cix hundred and fixty-fix pounds 
^^^' a-year ; and it is furprifmg, that while the queen's 
demands were fo moderate, and her expences fo weli 
regulated, Ihe fliould ever have found any difficulty 
jn obtaining a fupply from parliament, or he reduced 
to make fale of the crown-lands. But fuch was the 
extrem.e, I had almoft faid abfurd, parfmiony of the 
parliaments during that period. They valu.ed no- 
thing in comparifon of their money. The members 
Jiad no connexion with the court ; and the very idea 
which they conceived of the trufi: com.mitted to 
them was, to reduce the demands of the crown, and 
to grant as few fupplies as poiiible. The crown, on 
the other hand, conceived the parliament in no 
jDther light than as a means of fupply. Queen Eli- 
zabeth made a merit to her people of feldom fum- 
moning parliaments ". No redrefs of grievances was 
expected from thefe aiTemblies : They were fuppofed 
to meet for no ether purpofe than to impofe taxes. " 

Before the reign of Elizabeth, the Englilli 
princes had ufually recourfe to the city of Antwerp 
for voluntary loans ; and their credit was fo low, 
that befides p^iying the high interefl of ten or twelve 
per cent, they were obliged to make the city of Lon- 
don join in the fecurity. Sir Thomas Grefham, 
that great and enterpriiing merchant, one of the 
chief ornaments of this reign, engaged the company 
of merchant adventurers to grant a loan to the 
queen ; and as the money was regularly repaid, her 
credit by degrees eftabliihed itfelf in the city, and 
ilie fliook off this dependence on foreigners ^ 

In the year 1559, however, the queen employed 
Grelliam to borrow for her two hundred thoufand 

which will induce our creditois to r^'linquifh their clairr.s, or the 
j^ubiic to feize their revenues. So egregious indeed has been our folly, 
that we have even loft all title to comjiafiion in the numherkls cala- 
mities that are waiting us. ' Strype, V9I. iv. p. 124. 
* Stowe's Survey cf Loudon, book i. p.aS6. 

. . pounds 



A P P E N D I }t Ilf. 



477 



pounds at Antwerp, in order to enable her to re- Apprndijc 
form the coin, which was at that time extremely ^^^' 
debafed '. She was fo impolitic as to make, herfelf, 
an innovation in the coin ; by dividing a pound of 
fdver into fixty-two (hillings, inftead of fixty the 
former ftandard. This is the lafl time that the 
coin has been tampered with in England. 

Qi^JEEN Elizabeth, fenfible how much the defence Com- 
of her kingdom depended on its naval power, was ""^'c«- 
defirous to encourage commerce and navigation : 
But as her monopolies tended to extinguifh all do-^ 
meflic induftry, which is much more valuable than 
foreign trade, and is the foundation of it, the gene- 
ral train of her conduft was ill calculated to ferve 
the purpofe at which {he aimed, much lefs to pro- 
mote the riches of her people. The excluiive com- 
panies alfo were an immediate check on foreign. 
trade. Yet, notwithftanding thefe difcouragements, 
the fpirit of the age was ftrongly bent on naval en- 
terprifes ; and befides the military expeditions againft 
the Spaniards, many attempts were made for new 
difcoveries, and many new branches of foreign com- 
merce were opened by the Englifn. Sir Martin 
Frobiiher undertook three fruitlefs voyages to dif- 
cover the north-wed: paflage : Davis, not difcou-. 
raged by this ill fuccefs, m.ade a new attempt, when 
he difcovered the ftraits which pafs by his name. 
In the year 1 6co, the queen granted the firfl patent 
to the Eafl-India company : The flock of that 
company was fetenty-two thoufand pounds ; and 
they fitted out four fliips under the command of 
James Lancafler, for this new branch of trade. The 
adventure was fuccefsful ; and the fhips returning 
with a rich cargo, encouraged the company ter 
continue the commerce. 

The communication with Mufcovy had been 
opened in queen's Mary's time by the difcovery of 

^ MSvof ioid Ro^f^ou's frgm the Paper-office, p. 29?. 

the 



475 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

Appendix the paflage to Arohangelt But tjie commerce to 
^^^- that country did not begin to be carried on to a 
great extent till about the year 1569. The queen 
obtained from the czar an exclufive patent to the 
EngUfli for the whole trade of Mufcovy ^ ; and fhe 
entered into a perlbnal as well as national alliance 
with him. This czar was named John Bafilides, a 
furious tyrant, who, continually fufpedling the revolt 
of his fubjcfts, ftipulated to have a fafe retreat and 
proteftion in England. In order the better to en- 
fure this relburce, he purpofed to marry an Englifii 
woman ; and the queen intended to have fent him 
Jady Anne Hailings, daughter of the earl of Hun- 
tingdon : But when the lady was informed of the 
barbarous manners of the country, flie wifely de- 
clined purchafmg an empire at the expence of her 
eafe and fafcty^. 

The Englilh, encouraged by the privileges which 
they had obtained from iiafilides, ventured farther 
Into thofe countries than any Europeans had for- 
merly done. They tranfported their goods along 
the river Dwina in boats made of one entire tree, 
■which they towed and rowed up the Ilream as far as 
Walogda. Thence they carried their commodities 
feven days journey by land to Yerailau, and then 
down the Volga to Aftracan. At Aftracan they 
built fliips, croilcd the Cafpian Sea, and diftributed 
their manufadlures into Perfia. But this bold at- 
tempt met with fuch difcouragements, that it was. 
never renewed''. 

• After the death of John Bafilides, his fon The- 
odore revoked the patent which the Englifli enjoyed 
for a monopoly of the Rufiian trade : When the 
queen remonifrated againlt this innovation, he told 
her miniflers, that princes mufl carry an indifferent 
hand, as well between their fubjefts as between fo- 

* Cairnkn, p. 408. e Ibid. p. 493. ^ Ib'ul. p.418. 

J 3 rcigners ; 



APPENDIX III. 479 

mgners ; and not convert trade, which by the laws Appendix 
of nations ought to be common to all, into a mono- ^'^* 
poly for the private gain of a few'. So much juflcr 
notions of commerce were entertained by this bar- 
barian than appear in the condu6l of the renowned 
queen Elizabeth ! Theodore, however, continued 
fome privileges to the Englifh, on account of their 
being the difcoverers of the communication between 
Europe and his country. 

The trade to Turkey commenced about the year 
1583; and that commerce was immediately con- 
fined to a company by queen Elizabeth. Before 
that time, the grand fignior had always conceived 
England to be a dependent province of France ^ ; 
but having heard of the queen's power and reputa- 
tion, he gave a good reception to the Englifli, and 
even granted them larger privileges than he had 
given to the French. 

The merchants of the Ilanfe-towns complained 
loudly, in the beginning of Elizabeth's reign, of the 
treatment v/hich they had received in the reigns of 
Edward and Mary. She prudently replied, that as 
flie would not innovate any thing, (lie would ftill 
protect ihem in the immunities and privileges of 
which fhe found them poiTefled. This anfwer not 
contenting them, their commerce was foon after 
fufpended for a time, to the great advantage of the 
Englifh merchants, who tried what they could them- 
felves effeft for promoting their commerce. They 
took the whole trade into their own hands ; and 
their returns proving fuccefsful, they divided them- 
felves into ftaplers and merchant adventurers ; the 
former refiding conftantly at one place, the latter 
trying their fortunes in other towns and ilates abroad 
with cloth and other manufaftures. This fuccefs 



i Cau)<i:rt, p. 493. ^ Birch's Memoirs, vol. 1. p. 36. 

fo 



4^6 HIStOHY OF ENGLAND. 

Appendix fo enraged the Hanfe-towns, that they tried all the 
^^^- methods which a difcontented people could devife, 
to draw upon the Englifli merchants the ill opinion 
of other nations and ftates. They prevailed fo far 
as to obiain an imperial edift, by which the Engliih 
were prohibited all commerce in the empire : Thef 
queen, by way of retaliation, retained fixty of their 
ftips, which had been feized in the ri\'er Tagus 
with contraband goods of the Spaniards* Thefe 
fliips the queen intended to have reftored, as defir- 
ing to have compromifed all differences with thofe 
trading cities ; but when (he was informed that a 
general aiT;mbly^was held at Lubec, in order to 
concert meafures for diftreffing the Englifh trade, 
Ihe caufed the fhips and cargoes to be confifcated ; 
Only two of them, v/ere releafed to carry home the 
news, and to inform thefe ftates that ihe had the 
greateft contempt imaginable for all their proceed- 
ings '. 

Henry VIII. in order to fit out a navy, was 
obliged to hire fliips from Hamburgh, Lubec^ 
Dantzic, Genoa, and Venice : But Elizabeth, very 
early in her reign, put aflairs upon a better footing ; 
both by building fome fliips of her own, and by en- 
couraging the m.erchants to build large trading vef- 
fels, which on occafion v/ere converted into fhips of 
war"". In the year 1582, the feamen in England 
were found to be fourteen thoufand two hundred and 
ninety-live men " ; the number of veffels twelve 
hundred and thirty-two ; of which there were only 
two hundred and feventeen above eighty tons. 
Monfon pretends, that though navigation decayed 
in the firft years of James I. by the practice of the 
merchants, who carried on their trade in foreign 
bottoms °, yet before the year 1640 this number 
of feam.en was tripled in England •". 



I 



1 L!ves of the Admirals, vol. i. p. 4.7a, •* Gamcfen, 

,p.388. n Mor.fon, p. 256. «> Ibid. p. 3°°' 

P Ibid, p. 2,10. 25S. 

9 



The 



APPENDIX III. 4gi 

The navy which the queen left at her deceafe Apn-ndix 
appears confiderable, when we refleft only on the -'*• 
number of veflels, which were forty-two : But when )^!^^ 
we confider that none of thefe Ihips carried above force. 
forty guns ; that four only came up to that number ; 
that there were but two fhips of a thoufand tons ; 
and twenty-three below five hundred, fome of fifty, 
and fome even of twenty tons ; and that the v\'hole 
number of guns belonging to the fleet was kvcn 
hundred and feventy-four '^ ; we muff entertain a 
contemptible idea of the Englifli navy, compared 
to the force which it has now attained '. In the 
year 1588, there were not above five velltls fitted 
out by the noblemen and fea-pcrts which exceeded 
two hundred tons \ 

In the year 1599, an alarm vt^as given of an in- 
vafion by the Spaniards ; and the queen equipped a 
fleet and levied an army in a fortnight to oppofe 
them. Nothing gave foreigners a higher idea of 
the power of England than this fudden armament. 
In the year 1575, all the mihtia in the kingdom 
were computed at a hundred and eighty-two thou- 
fand nine hundred and twenty-nine '. A diflribu- 
tion was made in the year 1595 of a hundred and 
forty thoufand men, befides thofe which Wales 
could fupply ". Thefe armies were formidable by 
their numbers ; but their difcipline and experience 
were not proportionate. Sm/all bodies from Dun- 
kirk and Newport frequently ran over and plundered 
the eaft coafl : So unfit was the militia, as it was 
then conftituted, for the defence of the kingdom. 
The lord lieutenants were firft appointed to the 
counties in this reign. 

Mr. IVIurden "^ has publiflied from the Salifbury 
colleftions, a paper which contains the military force 

1 Monfon, p. 196. The Enelifh navy at prefent carries about 
14,009 guns. ' See note [NN] at tbe end of ihe volume. 

* iVionfon, p. 500. t Lives of the Aamiials, vol. i. p. 43a, 

■ Strype, vol. iv. p. 221. ^ P. 6o3. 

Vol. V. I i of 



482 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

Appendix o*" t^s nation at the time of the Spanifh Armada, 
HI' and which is fomewhat different from the account 
given by our ordinary hiftorians. It makes all the 
able-bodied men of the kingdom amount to a hun- 
dred and eleven thoufand five hundred and thirteen; 
thofe armed, to eighty thoufand eight hundred and 
feventy-five ; of whom forty-four thoufand feven 
hundred and twenty-feven were trained. It muQ: 
be fuppofed that thefe able-bodied men confifted of 
fuch only as were regiftered, otherwife the fmall 
number is not to be accounted for. Yet fir Ed- 
ward Coke " faid in the houfe of commons, that he 
was employed about the fame time, together with 
Popham, chief juftice, to take a furvey of all the 
people of England, and that they found them to be 
900,000 of all forts. This number, by the ordinary 
rules of computation, fuppofes that there were above 
200,000 men able to bear arms. Yet even this 
number is furprifmgly fmall. Can we fuppofe that 
the kingdom is fix or feven times more populous at 
prefent ? And that Murden*s was the real number 
of men, excluding catholics and children, and infirm 
perfons ? 

Harrison fays, that in the mufters taken in the 
years 1574 and 1575, the men fit for fervice 
amounted to 1,172,674; yet was it believed that a 
full third was omitted. Such uncertainty and con- 
tradiction are there in all thefe accounts. Notwith- 
ftanding the greatnefs of this number, the fame au- 
thor complains much of the decay of populoufnefs : 
A vulgar complaint in all places and all ages. 
Guicciardini makes the inhabitants of England in 
this reign amount to two millions. 

W?iaT£ver opinion we may form of the compa- 
rative populoufnefs of England in diil^rent periods, 
it mufl be allowed that, abflracllng from the na- 
tional debt, there is a prodigious increafe of power 

•'* Jouru. ^5 A])n! 1621* 



APPENDIX IIL 483 

in that, miore perhaps thtin in any other European Appendix 
Hate fince the beginning <jf the laft century. It '^'' 
would be iio paradox to amrm, that Ireland alone 
could at prefcnt exert a greater force than all the 
three kingdoms were capable of at the death of 
queen Elizabeth. And we might go farther, and 
aflert, that one good county in England is able to 
make, at lead to fupport, a greater effort than 
the whole kingdom was capable of in the reign of 
Harry V. ; when the maintenance of a garrifon in a 
fmall town like Calais formed more than a third of 
the ordinary national expence. Such are the effects 
of liberty, induftry, and good government ! 

The ftate of the Enghdi manufaftures was at 
this time very low ; and foreign wares of almoft all 
kinds had the preference^. About the year 1590, 
there were in London four perfons only rated in the 
fubfidy-books fo high as four hundred pounds ^. 
This computation is not, indeed, to be deemed an 
exaft eflimate of their wealth. In 1567 there were 
found, on inquiry, to be four thoufand eight hun- 
dred and fifty-one ilrangers of all nations in London: 
Of whom three thoufand eight hundred and thirty- 
eight were Flemings, and only fifty-eight Scots \ 
The perfecutions in France and the Low Countries 
drove afterwards a greater number of foreigners into 
England ; and the commerce as well as manufac-^ 
tures of that kingdom was very much improved by 
them ''. It was then that fir Thomas Grefliani built, 
at his own charge, the magnificent fabric of the 
Exchange for the reception of the merchants : The 
queen vifited it, and gave it the appellation of the 
Royal ExchangCi 

By a lucky accident in language, which has a 
great effecl on men's ideas, the invidious word 
ufury, which formerly meant • the raking of any 
interefl for money, came now to exprefs only the 

y D'Ewes, p. 505. 2 IJ.p. 497. 

* ideyiies, p. ^^^i, 46a. '^ S;c;\ve, p. 66S. 

1 i 2 ;■- ' taking 



484 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

Appendix taking of exorbitant and illegal intereft. An a£l 
paflfed in 1571 violently condemns all ufury ; 
but permits ten per cent, intereft to be paid. 
Henry IV. of France reduced intereft to 6^ per 
cent : An indication of the great advance of France 
above England in commerce. 

Dr. flowEL fays % that queen Elizabeth in the 
third of her reign was prefented with a pair of 
black filk knit ftockings by her filkwoman, and 
never wore cloth hofe any more. The author of 
the prefent State of England fays, that about 1577, 
pocket watches vi^ere firfl brought into. England 
from Germany. They are thought to have been 
invented at Nuremberg. About 1580, the ufe of 
coaches was introduced by the earl of Arundel^. 
Before that time, the queen, on public occalions, 
rode behind her chamberlain. 

Camden fays, that in 1581 Randolph, fo much 
employed by the queen in foreign embaffies, pof- 
feifed the office of poft-mafter-general of England. 
It appears, therefore, that ports were then eftablifh- 
ed ; though, from Charles I.'s regulations in i 6t, 5, 
it would feem that few poft-houfes were erefted 
before that time. 

In a remonftrance of the Hanfe Towns to the diet 
of the empire in 1582, it is affirmed that England 
exported annually about 200,000 pieces of cloth % 
This number feems to be much exaggerated. 

In the fifth of this reis-n was enacted the firfl law 
for the relief of the poor. » 

A JUDICIOUS author of that are confirms the 
vulgar obfervation, that the kingdom was depopu- 
lating from the increafe of inclofures and decay of 
tillage ; and he afcribes the reafon very juftly to the 
refhraints put on the exportation of corn ; while full 
liberty was allowed to export all the produce of paf- 
turage, fuch as wool, hides, leather, tallow, &c. 

<: Hiiiory of the World, vol. ii. p, 222= ^ Anderfon, 

vol, i. p. 4-ai, e Andeiion, vol. i. p. 424t 

Thefe 



APPENDIX III. 485 

Thefe prohibitions of exportation were derived from Appendix 
the prerogative, and were very injudicious. The ^^^" 
queen, once, on the commencement of her reign, 
had tried a contrary pradice, and with good fuccefs. 
From the fame author we learn, that the complaints 
renewed in our time, were then very common, con- 
cerning the high prices of every thing ^ There 
feems, indeed, to have been two periods in which 
prices rofe remarkably in England, namely, that in 
queen Elizabeth's reign, when they are computed- to 
have doubled, and that in the prefent age. Between 
the two, there feems to have been a ftagnation. It 
would appear that induftry, during that intermediate 
period, increafed as fad as gold ^.iid filver, and kept 
commodities nearly at a par with money. 

There were tv/o attempts made in this reign to 
fettle colonies in America ; one by fir Humphrey 
Gilbert in Newfoundland, another by fir Walter 
Raleigh in Virginia : But neither of thefe proje6ls 
proved fuccefsful. All thofe noble fettlements were 
made in the follov/ing reigns. The current fpecie 
of the kingdom In the end of this reign is computed 
at four millions ^. 

The earl of LeIcefter defired fir Francis Walfing- 
ham, then ambaifador in France, to provide him 
with a riding-mailer in that country, to whom he 
promifes a hundred pounds a-year, befides maintain- 
ing himfelf and fervant, and a couple of horfes. " I 
" know," adds the earl, " that fuch a man as I 
" want may receive higher wages in France : But 

f A compendious or brief Examination of certain ordinsry Com- 
plaints of divers of our Countrymen. The author fays, that in 20 
or 30 years before 1581, conimodities had in general rifen 50 per 
cent. ; fome more. Cannot you, neighi>our, remember, fays he, that 
within thefe 30 years, I couUJ in this town buy the bell pig or goofe 
I could lay my han-!s on fo- four-pence, which now coiteth twelve- 
pence, a good capon for ihree-pence or four pence, a chicken for a 
penny, a hen for two-pence? p. 35. Yet the piice of ordinary labour 
was then eight- pence a-u'a) , p. 31. 

6 Lives of the Admirals, vol. i. p. 475, 

1x3 "let 



486 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

App?n(Ux ^' let him confider, that a fhilling in England goes 
^^j^li, " as far as two iliillings in France \" It is known. 

that every thing is much changed fnice that time. 
Manners. ^'^^ nobility in this age ftill fup ported, in fome 
degree, the ancient magnificence in their hofpita- 
iity, and in the numbers of their retainers ; and the 
queen found it prudent to retrench, by proclama- 
tion, their expences in this laft particular '. The 
expence of hofpitality (he fomewhat encouraged by 
the frequent vifits (he paid her nobility, and the 
fumptuous feails which llie received from them ''. 
The earl of Leicefter gave her an entertainment in 
Kenilworth caftle, w^hich was extraordinary for ex- 
pence and magnificence. Among other particulars, 
we are told, that three hundred and fixty-five hogf- 
heads of beer were drunk at it '. The earl had for- 
tified this caftle at great expence ; and it contained 
arms for ten thoufand men'". The earl of Derby 
• ■ had a family confiding of two hundred and forty 

fervants ". Srowe remarks it as a fmgular proof of 
beneficence in this nobleman, that he was contented 
with his rent from his tenants, and exafted not any 
extraordinary fervices from them. : A proof that the 
great power of the fovereign (what was almofl un- 
avoidable) had very generally countenanced the 

^ Digges*s Complete Amballdilor. ^ Stiype, vol. iif. 

Appendix, p. 54.. 

^ Havriibn, alter enumerating the queen's palaces, adds: ** But 
•♦ what fliall I need to take upon me to repeat all, and tell what 
" houfes the queen's majefty hath? Sith all is hers; and when it 
*• pleafeth her in the fumtner feafon to recreate herfelf abroad, and 
*' view t!ie eftate of the country, aii(i hear the comphiints of her poor 
" commons injured by her unju'l officers or their fnbftitutes, every 
" nobleman's hoiile is her pabcc, where (he ccntinuctli during plca- 
" fure, and till /he return again to lome of her own, in which (he 
*' ifcmaineth fo long as (he pleafeth." l>ook ii. chap. 15. Surely 
one may hy of fuch a guell what Cicfro fays to Ai'.icus on 0(ca(ioii 
of a vilit [.aid him l-y Csefdr : Hofpes tamei) non is ciii diceres, 
amabo le, t6i!em ad me cum revertere. Lib. x'i. Ep. 52. If (he 
relieved the people from opprediona (to whom it leems the law could 
give no relit}), her vilits were a great opprelfion on the nobility. 

^ Biogr. Brit. vol. iii. p. 1791. "> Strype, vol. iii. 

J>, 2W " Stowfj p. (i;.].. 

nobility 



APPENDIX III. 487 

nobility in tyrannifing over the people. Burleigh, AppriKiix 
though he was frugal, and had no paternal eftate, ^ ]]^^ 
kept a family confifting of a hundred fervants ". He 
had a (landing table for gentlemen, and two other 
tables for perfons of meaner condition, which were al- 
ways ferved alike, whether he were in town or in the 
country. About his perfon he had people of great dif- 
tinclion, infomuch that he could reckon up twenty 
gentlemen retainers, who had each a thoufand pounds 
a-year ; and as many among his ordinary fervants, 
who were worth from a thoufand pounds to three, 
five, ten, and tv/enty thoufand pounds ^. It is to be 
remarked, that though the revenues of the crown 
were at that time very fmall, the minifters and 
courtiers fometimes found means, by employing the 
boundlefs prerogative, to acquire greater fortunes 
than it is polTible for them at prcferit to amafs, from 
their larger falaries, and more limited authority. 

Burleigh entertained the queen twelve fcveral 
times in his country-houfe ; where fhe remained 
three, four, or five weeks at a time. Each vifit 
cofl him two or three thoufand pounds •. The 
quantity of filver- plate polfelTed by this nobleman 
is furprifmg : No lels than fourteen or fifteen thou- 
fand pounds weight' ; which befides the fafliion 
would be above forty-two thoufand pounds flerling 
in value. Yet Burleigh left only 4000 pounds a- 
year in land, and 1 1,000 pounds in money ; and as 
land was then commonly fold at ten years purchafe, 
his plate was nearly equal to all the reft of his for- 
tune. It appears that little value was then put upon 
the fafliion of the plate, which probably was but rude : 
The weight was chiefly confidered^ 

9 Strype, vol. iii. p. 149, Append. P Life of Burleigh, 

publidied by Collins. 1 Ibid. p. 40. 

«■ See note ['.'U] at the end of the voiumc. 

* This appears from Kiirleigh's will; He fptcifies oiih' t!ie miinber 
of ounces to i)e givK-n to each legatee, nnd appoints a goUifirnth to fee 
it weighed out to them, without making any diRii:^ieii of the piect-s. 

li 4 But, 



HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

But, though there were preferved great remains 
of the ancient cuftoms, the nobility '/'ere by degrees 
acquiring a tafte for elegant luxury ; and many edi- 
fices in particular were built by them, neat, large, 
and fumptuous, to the great ornament of the king- 
dom, fays Camden * ; but to the no lefs decay of 
the glorious hofpitality of the nation. It is, how- 
ever, more reafonable to think, that this new turn 
of cxpence promoted arts^nd induftry ; while the 
ancient hofpitality w^as the fource of vice, diforder, 
fedition, and idlenefs ", 

Among the other fpecies of luxury, that of ap- 
parel began much to increafe during this age ; and 
the queen thought proper to reftrain it by proclama- 
tion "*". Her example was very little conformable 
to her edicts. As no woman was ever more con- 
ceited of her beauty, or more defirous of making 
impreiTion on the hearts of beholders, no one ever 
went to a greater extravagance in apparel, or fludied 
more the variety and richnefs of her dreffes. She 
appeared almoll every day in a di&rent habit ; and 
tried all the feveral modes by which ihc hoped to 
render herfclf agreeable. She was alfo fo fond of her 
clothes, that fhe never could part with any of them ; 
and at her death Hie had in her wardrobe all the dif- 
ferent habits, to the number of three thoufand, 
which file had ever worn in her lifetime ''. 

The retrenchment of the ancient hofpitality, and 
the diminution of retainers, were favourable to the 
prerogative of the fovereign ; and by difabling the 
great noblemen from refiitance, promoted the exe- 
cution of the laws, and extended the authority of 
the courts of juftice. There vvere many peculiar 
caufes in the fuuation and chara£ter of Henry VII. 
which augmented the authority of the crown : Mofl 

' P?gc 452. u Sec note [PT] at the eiu! of tlie volume. 

'^' C. imleii, p. 452. ^ Caitt, vol. iii. i>. 702, tiom 

Beauiiiont''5 Dilpatches. 

of 



APPENDIX III. 4^1^ 

of thefe caufes concurred in fucceeding princes ; Appendix 
together with the faftions in religion, and the ac- ^^^' 
quifition of the fupremacy, a moft important article 
of prerogative : But the manners of the age were 
a general caufe which operated during this whole 
period, and which continually tended to diminiih 
the riches, and ftill more the influence of the ari- 
ftocracy, anciently fo formidable to the crown. The 
habits of luxury diffipated the immenfe fortunes of 
the ancient barons ; and as the new methods of ex- 
pence gave fubfillence to mechanics and merchants, 
who lived in an independent manner on the fruits of 
their own induflry, a nobleman, inflead of that un- 
limited afcendant which he was wont to affume over 
thofe who were maintained at his board, or fubfifted 
by falaries conferred on them, retained only that 
moderate influence which cu Homers have over 
tradefmen, and which can never be danoerous to 
civil government. The landed proprietors alfo, 
having a greater demand for money than for men, 
endeavoured to turn their lands to the beft account 
with regard to profit ; and either inclofing their 
fields, or joining many fmall farms into a few large 
ones, difmifled thofe ufelefs hands which formerly 
were always at their call in every attempt to fubvert 
the government, or oppofe a neighbouring baron. 
By all thefe means the cities increafed ; the middle " 
rank of men began to be rich and powerful ; the 
prince, who in efl*eO: was the fame with the law, 
was implicitly obeyed ; and though the farther pro- 
grefs of the fame caufes begat a new plan of liberty, 
founded on the privileges of the commons, yet in 
the interval between the fall of the nobles and the 
rife of this order, the fovereign took advantage of 
the prefent fituation, and aflfumed an authority al- 
mofl: abfolute. 

Whatever may be commonly imagined, from 
the authority of lord Bacon, and from that of Har- 
rington, and later authors, the laws of Henry VII. 

coiitri- 



490 HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

Appendix contributed very little towards the great revolution 
^^^JfJ,.^^^ which happened about this period in the Englifli 
conftitution. The pradice of breaking entails by 
a fine and recovery had been introduced in the pre- 
ceding reigns ; and this prince only gave indiredly 
a legal fanftion to the practice, by reforming fome 
abufes which attended it. But the fettled authority 
which he acquired to the crown, enabled the fove- 
reign to encroach on the feparate jurifdiftions of the 
barons, and produced a more general and regular 
execution of the laws. The counties palatine un- 
4erwent the fame fate as the feudal powers ; and, 
by a ftatute of Henry VIII.'', the jurifdidion of 
thefe counties was annexed to the crown, and all 
writs were ordained to run in the king's name. But 
the change of manners was the chief caufe of the 
fecret revolution of government, and fubverted the 
power of the barons. There appear ftill in this 
reign fome remains of the ancient flavery of the 
boors and peafants^, but none afterwards. 
Learning. Learning, on its revival, was held in high efli* 
mation by the Englifh princes and nobles ; and as 
it was not yet proltituted by being too common, 
even the great deemed it an objed of ambition to 
attain a character for literature. The four fucc^f* 
five fovereigns, Henry, Edward', Mary, end Elizas 
beth, may on one account or oi'ner be admitted into 
the clafs of authors. Queen Catharine Parr tranf*. 
lated a book : Lady Jiuie Gray, confidering her 
age, and her fex, and her ftaticn, may be regarded 
as a prodigy of literature. Sir 1 homas Smith was 
raifed from being profeflbr in Cambridge, firft to be 
ambaffador to France, then fecretary of ftaie. The 
difpatches of thofe times, and among others thofe of 
Burleigh himfelf, are frequently interlarded with 
quotations from the Greek and Latin ciaflics. Ever^ 
the ladies of the court valued themfelyes on know- 

J' rjHen. Vlir. c. 24. * Rymer, torn. xv. p. 73'ij, 

*5 ledge; 



APPENDIX III. • 491 

ledge : Lady Burleigh, lady Bacon, and their two Appendix 
fillers, were miftreites of the ancient as well as ^ ^^^^.^^ 
modern languages ; and placed more pride in their 
erudition than in their rank and quality. 

Queen Elizabeth wrote and tranflated feveral 
books ; and fhe was familiarly acquainted with the 
Greek as well as Latin tongue \ It is pretended 
that {he made an extemporary reply in Greek to the 
univerfity of Cambridge, who had addrefled her 
in that language. It is certain, that fhe anfwered 
in Latin without premeditation, and in a very fpi- 
rited manner, to the Pohfh ambaffador, who had 
been wanting in refpecl to her. When fhe had 
iinifhed, (lie turned about to her courtiers, and faid, 
^' God's death, my lords," (for fhe was much ad- 
dided to fwearing,) " I have been forced this day 
" to fcour up my old Latin that hath long lain 
" rufling''." EUzabeth, even after fhe was queen, 
did not entirely drop the ambition of appearing as 
an author ; and, next to her defire of ambition for 
beauty, this feems to have been the chief object of 
her vanity. She tranflated Boethius of the Confo- 
lation of Philofophy ; in order, as flie pretended, to 
allay her grief for Henry IV.'s change of religion. 
As far as we can judge from Elizabeth's compofi- 
tions, we may pronounce, that, notwithftanding her 
application and her excellent parts, her tafle in lite- 
rature was but indifferent : She was much inferior 
to her fucceffor in this particular, who was himfelf 
no perfed: model of eloquence. 

TJNKArpiLY for Hterature, at leafl for the learned 
of this age, the queen's vanity lay more in fhining 
by her own learning, than in encouraging men of 
genius by her liberality. Spenfer himfejf, the hneit 
Englifli writer of his age, was long negleded ; and 
after the death of fir Philip Sydney, his patron, was 
allowed to die ahnofl for want, 'fhis poet contains 

a See note [Q(Jv.l ^' ^'^^ ^"'^ "^ ^''^ volume. *> Speed. 

great 



49* HISTORY OF ENGLAND. 

i^ppendix great beauties, a fvveet and harmonious verfification, 
^^^' eafy elocution, a fine imagination : Yet does the 
perufal of his work become fo tedious, that one 
never finiihes it from the mere pleafure which it 
affords : It foon becomes a kind of taik reading ; 
and it requires fome effort and refolution to carry 
us on to the end of his long performance. This 
effeft, of which every one is confcious, is ufually 
afcribed to the change of manners : But manners 
have more changed fmce Homer's age ; and yet 
that poet remains ftill the favourite of every reader 
of tafte and judgment. Homer copied true natural 
manners, which, however rough or uncultivated, 
will always form an agreeable and intereiling pidure : 
But the pencil of the Englifh poet was employed in 
drawing the affectations, and conceits, and fopperies 
of chivalry, which appear ridiculous as foon as they 
iofe the recommendation of the mode. The tedi- 
cufnefs of continued allegory, and that too feldom 
ftriking or ingenious, has alfo contributed to render 
the Fairy ^een peculiarly tiiefome ; not to men- 
tion the too great frequency of its defcriptions, and 
the languor of its ftanza. Upon the whole, Spenfer 
maintains his place upon the ffielves among our 
Englifh claffics : But he is feldom feen on the table; 
and there is fcarcely any one, if he dares to be in- 
genuous, but will confefs, that, notwithftanding all 
the merit of the poet, he affords an entertainment 
with which the palate is foon fatiated. Several wri- 
ters of late have amufed themfelves in copying the 
ftyle of Spenfer ; and no imitation has been fo in- 
different as not to bear a great refembhnce to the 
original : His manner is To peculiar, that it is al- 
moll impoffible not to transfer fome of it into th« 
copy. 



t 493 J 



NOTES 



TO THE 



FIFTH VOLUME. 



NOTE [A], p. 13. 



THE parliament alfo granted the queen the duties of 
tonnage and poundage j but this concelhon was at 
that time regarded only as a matter of form, and (he 
had levied thefe duties before they were voted by parlia- 
ment. But there v/as another exertion of power which fhe 
pradlifed, and which people, in the prefent age, from their 
ignorance of ancient practices, may be apt to think a little 
extraordinary. Her filler, after the commencement of the 
war with France, had, from her own authority, impofed 
four marks on each ton of wine imported, and had in- 
creafed the poundage a third on all commodities. Queen 
Elizabeth continued thefe impofitions as long as fhe 
thought convenient. The parliament, who had fo good 
an opportunity of rcftraining thefe arbitrary taxes, when 
they voted the tonnage and poundage, thought not proper 
to make any mention of them. They knew that the fo- 
vereign, during that age, pretended to have the fole regu- 
lation of foreign trade, and that their intermeddling with 
that prerogative would have drawn on them the feverefl 
reproof, if not chaftifeQient. See Forbes, vol. i. p. 132, 
133- We know certainly, from the ftatutes and journals, 
that no fuch impoGtions were granted by parliament. 



494 ' NOTES TO THE FIFTH VOLUME. 



NOTE [B], p. 26. 

"IT'NOX, p. 127. We (hall fuggeft afterwards fonie 
■"^ reafonsto fufpe£l, that perhaps no exprefs promife was 
ever given. Calumnies eafily arife during times of faftion, 
cfpecially thofe of the religious kind, when itien think 
every art lawful for promoting their purpofe. The con- 
gregation in their manifefto, in which they enumerate all 
the articles of the regent's mal-adminiftration, do not re- 
proach her with this breach of promife. It was probablj' 
nothing but a. rumour fpread abroad to catch the populace- 
If the papifls have fometimes maintained, that no faith 
was to be kept with heretics, their adverfaries feem alfo 
to have thought, that no truth ought to be told of ido* 
laters. 



NOTE [CJ, p. 30. 

ePOTSWOOD, p. 146. Melvil, p. 29. Knox, p. 
^ 225. 228. Lefly, lib. X. That there was really no 
violation of the capitulation of Perth, appears from the 
manifeflo of the congregation in Knox, p. 184. in which 
it is not fo much afs pretended. The companies of Scotch 
foldiers were probably in Scotch pay, fince the congrega- 
ion complains, that the country was opprefled with taxe9 
to maintain armies. Knox, p. 164, 165. And even if 
they had been in French pay, it had been no breach of 
the capitulation, fince they M^ere national troops, not 
French. Knox does not fay, p. 139, that any of the in- 
habitants of Perth were tried or puniflied for their pad of- 
fences; but only that they were opprefled with the quar- 
tering of foldiers : And the congregation, in their mani- 
feflo, fay only that many of them had fled for fear. This 
plain dete6lion of the calumny, with regard to the breach 
of the capitulation of Perth, may make us fufpefl a like 
calumny with regard to the pretended promife not to give 
fentence againft: the minifl:ers. The afF-iir lay altogether 
between the regent and the laird of Dun ; and that gen- 
tleman, though a man of fenfe and character, might be 
tvilllng to take fome general profeflTions for promifes. If 
the queen, overawed by the power of the congregation, 
gave fucli a promife in order to have liberty to proceed to 

a fetl- 



NOTES TO THE FIFTH VOLUME. 

a fentence ; how could (he cxpe6l to have power to exe- 
cute a fentence fo intidioufly obtained? And to what pur- 
pofe could it ferve ? 

NOTE [D], p. 31. 

■jy'NOX, p. 153, 154, 155. This author pretends that 
-■^ this article was agreed to verbally, but that the 
queen's fcribes omitted it in the treaty which was figned. 
The ftory is very unlikely, or rather very abfurd ; and in 
the mean time it is allowed that the article is not in the 
treaty j nor do the congregation, in their fubfequent ma- 
nifefto, infift upon it. Knox, p. 184. Befides, would 
the queen regent, in an article of a treaty, call her own 
religion idolatry ? 



NOTE [E], p. 33. 

'TTHE Scotch lords, in their declaration, fay, ** How 
**• " far we have fought fupport of England, or of any 
*' other prince, and what juft caufe we had and have fo to 
** do, we fhall fliortly make manifefh unto tlie world, to 
*' the praife of God's holy name, and to the confufion of 
" all thofe that flander us for fo doing : For this we fear 
" not to confefs, that, as in this enterprife againft the 
" devil, againft idolatry and the maintainers of the fame, 
** we chiefly and only feek God's glory to be notified unto 
<' men, fin to be puniihed, and virtue to be maintained ; 
** fo where power faileth of curfeives, we will feek it 
'* wherefoever God ihall offer the fame." Knox, p. 176- 



NOTE [F], p. 80. 

'ipHIS year the council of Trent was diiTolved, which 
■*- had fitten from 1545. The publication of its decrees 
excited anew the general ferment in Europe; while the 
catholics -endeavoured to enforce the acceptance of them, 
and the proteftants rejected them. The religious contro- 
verfies were too far advanced to expe£l that any conviclion 
would refult from the decrees of this council. It is the 
only general council which has been held in an age truly 

learned 



4P5 



495 NOTES TO THE FIFTH VOLUME. 

learned and inqulfitive ; and as the hiftory of it has been 
written with great penetration and judgment, it has tended 
very much to expofe clerical ufurpations and intrigues, and 
may ferve us as a fpecimen of more ancient councils. No 
one expefts to fee another general council, till the decay 
of learning and the progrefs of ignorance fliall again fit 
mankind for thefe great impoftures. 



NOTE [G], p. 90. 

tT appears, however, from Randolf's Letters (fee 
-*■ Keith, p. 290.), that fome offers had been made to 
that minifter, of feizing Lenox and Darnley, and deliver- 
ing them into queen Elizabeth's hands. Melvil confirms 
the fame (lory, and fays, that the defign was acknowledged 
by the confpirators, p. 56. This ferves to juftify the ac- 
count given by the queen's party of the Raid of Baith, as 
it is called. See farther, Goodal), vol. ii. p. &58. The 
other confpiracy, of which Murray complained, is much 
more uncertain, and is founded on very doubtful evi-v 
dence. 



NOTE [H], p. 95. 

T>UCH.A.NAN confefies that Rizzio was ugly; but It 
-*-* may be inferred, from the narration of that author, 
that he was young. He fays, that on the return of the 
duke of Savoy to Turin, Rizzio was in adolefcentia vigors, 
in the vigour of youth. Now that event happened only a 
few ycaTS before, lib. xvii. cap. 44. That Bothwel was 
young appears, among many other invincible proofs, 
from Mary's inftru6lions to the bifhop of Dumblain, her 
ambafiador at Paris; where fhe fays, that in 1559, only 
eight yeax's before, he was very young. He might there- 
fore have been about thirty when he married \\i.r. See 
Keith's Hiftory, p. 388. From the appendix to the 
EpiJloU Regum Scotoriimy it appears by authentic docu- 
ments, that Patrick earl of Bothwel, father to James, who 
efpoufed queen Mary, was alive till near the year 1560, 
Buchanan, by a miilake, which has been long ago cor- 
redled, calls him James. 

8 



M 



NOTES TO THE FIFTH VOLUME. 497 



NOTE [I], p. no. 

ARY herfelf confefled, in her in{lru£tIons to the am- 
baffadors whom (he fent to France, that Bothwel 
perfuaded all the noblemen that their application in favour 
of his marriage was agreeable to Kb". Keith, p. 389. 
Anderfon, vol. i. p. 94. Murray afterwards produced to 
queen Elizabeth's commiffioners, a paper figned by Mary, 
by which fhe permitted them to make this application to 
her. This permiflion was a fufficitnt declaration of her 
intentions, and was efteemed equivalent to a command. 
Anderfon, vol, iv. p. 59. They even aflerted, that the 
houfe in which they met was furrounded with armed men. 
Goodallj vol. ii. p. 141. 



NOTE [K], p. 141. 

MARlt 's complaint of the queen's partiality in admit- 
ting Murray to a conference, was a mere pretext in 
order to break off the conference. She indeed employs 
that reafon in her order for that purpofe, (fee Goodall, 
vol. ii. p. 184.) but in her private letter, her commiffioners 
are direcSled to make ufe of that order to prevent her ho- 
nour from being attacked. Goodall, vol. ii. p. 183. It 
was therefore the accufatlon only Ihe was afraid of. 
Murray was the lead obnoxious of all her enemies. He 
was abroad when her fubjefts rebelled, and reduced her 
to captivity: He had only accepted of the regency when 
Yoluntarily proffered him by the nation. His being ad- 
mitted to queen Elizabeth's prefence was therefore a very 
bad foundation for a quarrel, or for breaking off the con- 
ferenct ; and was plainly a mere pretence. 



NOTE [L], p. 143. 

1X7 E ftiall not enter into a long difcuflion concerning 
^^ the authenticity of thefe letters: We fhall only re- 
mark in general, that the chief objedtlons againft them 
arc, that they are fuppofed to have paffed through the earl 
of Morton's hands, the leaft fcrupulous of all Mary's 
enemies i and that they are to the lait degree indecent, and 
Vol, V. K k even 



498 NOTES TO THE TIFTH VOLUME. 

even fcmewhat inelegant, fuch as it is not likely fhe would 
v/rlte. But to thefe prefumptions we may oppofe the fol- 
lowii:g confideratlons. (i.) Though it be not difficult to 
counterfeit a fubicription, it 19 very difficult, and almoft 
impoffible, to counterfeit feveral pages, fo as to refemble 
exactly the hand -writing of any perfon. Thefe letters 
were examined and compared with Mary's hand-writing, 
by the Engliih privy-council, and by a great many of the 
nobility, among whom were feveral partifans of that 
princefs. They might have been examined by the biffiop 
of Rofs, lierreis, and others of Mary's commiffioners. 
The regent muft have expected that they would be very 
critically examined by them : And had they not been able 
to ftand that teft, he v/as only preparing a fcene of con- 
fufion to himfelf. Biftiop Lefly exprefsly declines the 
comparing of the hands, which he calls no legal proof. 
Goodall, vol. ii. p. 389. (2.) The letters are very long, 
much longer than they needed to have been, in order to 
ferve the purpofes of Mary's enemies ; a circumftance 
which increafed the difficulty, and expofed any forgery the 
more to the rifk of a detedlion. (3.) They are not fo 
grofs and palpable as forgeries commonly are, for they ftill 
left a pretext for Mary's friends to aflert, that their mean- 
ing' was drained to make them appear criminal. See 
Goodall, vol. ii. p. 361. (4.) There is a long contrail 
of marriage, faid to be written by the earl of Huntley, 
and figned by the queen, before Bothwel's acquittal. 
Would Morton, without any neceffity, have thus doubled 
the difficulties of the forgery and the danger of dete£tion ? 
(5.) The letters are indifcreet ; but fuch was apparently 
Mary's conduft at that time : They are inelegant ; but 
they have a carelefs, natural air, like letters hallily written 
between familiar friends. {6.) They contain fuch a variety 
of particular circumftances as nobody could have thought 
of inventing, efpecially as they muft neceflarily have affiarded 
her many means of detection. (7.) We have not the ori- 
ginals of the letters, which were in French ; We have 
only a Scotch and Latin tranflation from the original, and 
a French tranflation profefl^edly done from the Latin. 
Now it is remarkable that the Scotch tranflation is full of 
Gallicifms, and is clearly a tranflation from a French 
original: Such as make faulty fair e des f antes ; make it 
fftm that 1 believe^ fairs femhlartt de le croire i make brek^ 
fairs breche : this is my frj} journey^ c'eji ma premiere jour " 

ttte ; 



NOTES TO THE FIFTH VOLUMEi ^99 

nee ; have you not dejtre to laugh, fi'avez vous pas envie de 
rire ; the place ivill hald unto the deaths la place tiendra 
. jitfqu* a la mart ; he may not come forth of the houfe this long 
time, tl tie peut pai fortir du logis de long terns ; to make me 
advertifement , fair 771'avertir ; put order to ity mettre ordre 
cela ; difcharge ycur heart, decharger voire caeur ; niake gud 
nuatch, faitcs bonne gnrdcy &c. (8.) There is a converfa- 
tion which fhe mentions between herfelf and the king one 
evening : But Murray produced before the Englifh com" 
miffioners the teftimony of one Crawford, a gentleman of 
the earl of licnox, who fwore that the king, on her de- 
parture; from him, gave him an account of the fame con- 
verfation. (9.) There fcems very little reafon why Mur^ 
ray and his aflbciates fhould run the rifk of fuch a danger- 
ous forgery, which mull have rendered them infamous, if 
detected; fince their caufe, from Mary's known condudl, 
even without thefe letters, was fufficiently good andjufli- 
fiable. (10.) Murray expofed thefe letters to the exami- 
nation of perfons qualified to judge of tliem ; the Scotch 
council, the Scotch parliament, queen Elizabeth find her 
council, who were pofl'efled of a great number of Mary's 
genuine letters, (n.) He gave Mary herfelf an oppor- 
tunity of refuting and expofing him, if flie had chofen to 
lay hold of it. (i2.) The letters tally fo well with all 
the other parts of her condu£l during that tranfadlion, that 
thefe proofs throw the Itrongeft light on each other. (13.) 
The duke of Norfolk, who had examined thefe papers, 
and who favoured fo much the queen of Scots that he in- 
tended to marry her, and in the end loft his life in het 
caufe, yet believed them authentic, and was fully convinced 
of her guilt. This appears not only from his letters above 
mentioned to queen Elizabeth and her minifters, but by 
his fecret acknowledgment to Bannifter, his moft trufty 
confident. See State Trials, vol. i. p. 81. In the con- 
ferences between the duke, fecretary Lidington, and the 
biftiop of Rofs, all of them zealous partifans of that 
princefs, the fame thing is always taken for granted. Ibid. 
P* 74> 75- "See farther MS. in the Advocates' library, 
A. 3. 28. p. 314. from Cott. lib. Calig. c. 9. Indeed the 
duke's full perfuafion of Mary's guilt, without the leafl 
doubt or hefitation, could not have had place, if he had 
found Lidington or, the bilhop of Rofs of a different 
opinion, or if they had ever told him that thefe letters were 
forged. It is to be remarked, that Lidington, being one 
Kk 2 of 



500 KOTES TO THE FIFTH VOLUME. 

of tfie accomplices, knew the whole bottom of the con- 
fpiracy againft king Henry, and was befides a man of fuch 
penetration that nothing could efcape him in fuch inte«- 
refting events. (i4.) I need not repeat the prefumption 
drawn from Mary's refufal to anfwer. The only excufe 
for her filence is, that (he fufpe£led Elizabeth to be a par- 
tial judge; It was not indeed the intereft of that princefs 
to acquit and juftify her rival and competitor; and wc ac- 
cordingly find that Lidington, from the fecret information 
of the duke of Norfolk^ informed Mary, by the bifhop of 
Rofs, that the queen of England never meant to come to a 
decifion ; but only to get into her hands the proofs of Mary's 
guilt, in order to blaft her chara£ter. See State Trials, 
vol. i. p. 77. But this was a better reafon for declining 
the conference altogether, than for breaking it off on fri- 
volous pretences, the very moment the chief accufation 
was uneJcpedledly opened againft her* Though Ihe could 
not expe£l Elizabeth's final decifion in her favour, ic was of 
importance to give a fatisfadlory anfwer, if flie had any, to 

- the accufation of the Scotch commiflioners. That anfwer 
could have been difperfed for the fatisfa6tion of the public, 
of foreign nations, and of pofterity. And furely, after 
the accufation and proofs were in queen Elizabeth's hands, 
it could do no harm to give in the anfwers. Mary's inform- 
ation, that the queen never intended to come to a decifion* 
could be no obftacle to her juftification. (15.) The very 
difappearance of thefe letters is a prefumption of their au- 
thenticity. That event can be accounted for no way but 
from the care of king James's friends, who were defirous 
to deftroy every proof of his mother's crimes. The d\(* 
appearance of Morton's narrative, and of Crawford's evi- 
dence, from the Cotton library, Calig. c. i. muft have 

- proceeded from a like caufe. See MS. in the Advocates' 
library, A, 3. 29. p. 88. 

I find an objecfiion made to the authenticity of the 
letters, drawn from the vote of the Scotch privy -council, 
which affirms the letters to be written and fubfcribed by 
queen Mary's own hand ; whereas the copies given in to 
the parliament a few days after, were only written, not 
fubfcribed. See Goodall, vol. ii. p. 64. 67. But it is not 
confidered that this circumftance is of no manner of force : 
There were certainly letters, true or falfe, laid before the 
council J and whether the letters were true or falfe, this 
miftake proceeds equally from the inaccuracy or blunder 

of 



NOTES TO THE FIFTH VOLUME. $o: 

of the clerk. The miftake may be accounted for : The 
letters were only written by her: The fecond contract 
with Bothwel was only fubfcribed. A proper accurate 
didin^lion wa$ not made; and they are aU faid to be 
written and fubfcribed. A late writer, Mr. GoodaU, has 
endeavoured to prove that thefe letters clafli with chropo* 
logy, and that the queen was not in the places mentioned 
in the letters on the days there affigned : To confirm this, 
he produces charters and other deeds figned by the queen, 
where the date and place do not agree with the letters. 
But it is well known that the d?ite of charters, and fuch like 
grants, is no proof of the real day on which they were 
(igned by the fovereign. Papers of that kind commonly pafs 
through different offices : The date is affixed by the firft 
office, and may precede very long the day of the fignature. 

The account given by Morton of the manner in which 
the papers came into his hands, is very natural. When 
he gave it to the Englifh commiffioners, he had reafon to 
think it would be canvafled with all the feverity of able ad- 
verfaries, interefted in the higheft degree to refute it. It is 
probable that he could have confirmed it by many circmn-* 
ilances and teftimonies, fince they declined the conteft. 

The fonnets are inelegant; infomuch that both Bran* 
tome and Ronfard, who knew queen Mary's ftyle, wer« 
affiired, when they faw them, that they could not be of her 
compofition, Jebb, vol. ii. p. 47 8. But no perfon is equal 
in his produ61;ions, efpecially one whofe ftyle is fo little 
formed as Mary's muft be fuppofed to be. Not to mention 
that fuch dangerous and criminal enterprifes leave little 
tranquillity of mind for elegant poetical compofitions. 

In a word, queen Mary might eafily have conducted the 
whole confpiracy agalnfl her hulband, without opening her 
mind to any one perfon except Bothwel, and without 
writing a fcrap of paper about it ; but it was very difficult 
to have condudled it fo that her condudt ftiould not betray 
her to men of difcernment. In the prefent cafe her condud^ 
was fo grofs as to betray her-to every body ; qnd fortune 
threw into her enemies hands papers by which tliey could 
convi£l her. The fame infatuation and imprudence, which 
happily is the ufual attendant of great crimes, will account 
for both. It is proper to obferve, that ;here is not one 
eircumftance of the foregoing narrative, contained in the 
Jiiftory, that is taken from Kno:f, Buchanan, or even 
Thuanus, or indeed from any fufpeifted authority, 

Kk 3 



5oa NOTES TO THE FIFTH VOLUME, 



NOTE [M], p. 145. 

T tNLESiS we take this angry accufation, advanced by 
*^ queen Mary, to be an argument of Murray's guilt, 
there remains not the lead prefumption which fhould lead 
us to fufpe<ft him to have been anywife an accomplice in 
the king's murder. That queen never pretended to give 
any proof of the charge ; and her commiflioners affirmed 
at the time, that they themfelves knew of none, though 
they were ready to maintain its truth by their miftrefs's 
orders, and would produce fuch proof as Ihe fhould fend 
them. It is remarkable that, at that time, it was impof- 
fible for either her or them to produce any proof j becaufe 
the conferences before the Englilh commilfioners were pre- 
vioufly' broken oiF. 

It is true, the bifliop of Rofs, In an angry pamphlet, 
written by him under a borrowed name (where it is eafy to 
fay any thing), afhrms, that Lord Herreis, a few days after 
the king's death, charged Murray with the guilt, openly to 
his face at his own table. This latter nobleman, as Lefly 
relates the matter, affirmed, that Murray riding in Fife 
with one of his fervants, the evening before the commiffion 
of that crime, faid to him among other talk. This night ere 
morning the lord Darnley JJmll lofe his life. See Anderfon, 
vol. i. p. 75. But this is only a hearfay of Lefly's con- 
cerning a hearfay of Herreis's, and contains a very impro- 
bable facl. Would Murray, without any ufe or neceffity, 
communicate to a fervant, fuch a dangerous and import- 
ant fecret, merely by way of converfation .'' We may alfo 
obferve, that lord Herreis himfelf was one of queen Mary's 
commiffioners who accufed Murray. Had he ever heard 
this ftory, or given credit to it, was not that the time to 
have produced it ? and. not have affirmed, as he did, that 
he for his part knew nothing of Murray's guilt. See 
Goodall, vol. ii. p. 307. 

The earls of Huntley and Argyle accufe Murray of this 
crime ; but the reafon which they affign is ridiculous. He 
had given .his confent to Mary's divorce from the king; 
therefore he was the king's murderer. See Anderfon, vol. 
iv. part 2 p. 192. It is^fure argument that thefe carls 
knew no better proof againft Murray, otherwife they would 
have produced it, and not have infifted on fo abfurd a pre- 
fumption. Was not this alfo the time for Huntley to deny 

his 



NOTES TO THE FIFTH VOLUME. 

his writing Mary's contradl wltix Bothwel, if that paper 
had been a forgery r 

Murray could have no motive to commit that crime. 
The king, indeed, bore him fome ill willj' but the kin^ 
himfelf was become fo defpicable, both from his own ill 
condu(ft and the queen's averfion to him, that he could 
neither do good nor harm to any body. To judge by the 
event in any cafe is always abfurd, efpeciallyin the prefent. 
The king's murder, indeed, procured Murray the regency: 
But much more Mary's ill conduct and imprudence, which 
he could not poffibl/ forefee, and which never would have 
happened had flie been entirely innocent. 



503 



I 



NOTE [N], p. 145. 

Believe there is no reader of common fenfe who does 
not fee from the narrative in the text, that the author 
means to f<ay, that queen Mary refufes conftantly toanfwer 
before the Engliili commiihoners, but offers only to anfwer 
in perfon before queen Elizabeth in perfon, contrary to her 
praftice during the whole courfe of the conference, till the 
moment the evidence of her being an accomplice in her 
hufband's muriler is unexpe£ledly produced. It is true, 
the author having repeated four or five times an account of 
this demand of being admitted to Elizabeth's prefence, 
and having exprefled his opinion that, as it had been re- 
fufed from the beginning, even before the conniiencement 
of the conferences, fhe did not expe£l it would now be 
complied with ; thought it impoflible his meaning could be 
mifunderftood (as indeed it was impoflible), and not being 
willing to lire his reader with continual repetitions, he 
mentions in a paflage or two, fimply, that fhe had refufed 
to make any anfwer. I believe alfo, there is no reader of 
common fenfe who perufes Andcrfon or Goodall's collec- 
tions, and does not fee that, agreeably to this narrative, 
queen Mary infifls unalterably and ftrenuouflyon not con- 
tinuing to anfwer before the Englifh commiflioners, but 
infifts to be heard in perfon, by queen Elizabeth in perfon j 
though once or twice by way of bravado flie fays fimply, 
that flie will anfwer and refute her enemies, without in- 
ferting this condition, which Hill is underftood. But there 
is a perfon that has writ an Enquiry h'ljhrical and cril'ical into 
the Evidence again/} Mary ^leen of Scots i and has attempted' 

Kk 4 to 



504 NOTES TO THE FIFTH VOLUME. 

to refute the foregoing narrative. He quotes a fmgle paf- 
fage of the narrative, in which Mary is faid (imply to refufe 
anfwering ; and then a fingle paiTage from Goodall, in 
which (lie boafts (imply that (he will anfwer ; and he very 
civilly, and almoft directly, calls the author a liar, on ac- 
count of this pretended contradiction. That whole En- 
quiry, from beginning to end, is compofed of fuch fcan- 
dalous anises ; and from this inftance the reader may 
judge of the candour, fair dealing, veracity, and good 
manners of the Enquirer. There are, indeed, three events 
in our hiftory, which may be regarded as touchftones of 
party-men. An Engli(h Whig, who aflerts the reality of 
the popi(h plot, an Iri(h Catholic, who denies the ma(racre 
in 1 64 1, and a Scotch Jacobite, who maintains the inno- 
cence of queen Mary, rnuft be confidered as men beyond 
the reach of argument or reafon, and muit be left to their 
prejudices. 



NOTE [O], p. 167. 

1>Y Murden's (late papers, publlfhed after the writing of 
■*^ this hiftory, it appears, that an agreement had been 
made between Elizabeth and the regent for the delivering 
up of Mary to him. The queen afterwards fcnt down 
KUigrew to the earl of Marre when regent, offering to 
put Mary into his hands. Killigrew was inftrudled to take 
good fe'curity from the regent, that that queen (hould be 
tried fbr her crimes, and that the fentence (hould be exe- 
cuted upon her. It appears that Marre rejected the offer, 
becaufe we hear no more of it. 



NOTE [P], p. 169. 

CiR James Mclvrl, p. 108, 109, afcribes to Elizabeth a 
*^ pofitive defign of animating the Scotch factions againft 
each other ; but his evidence is too inconfiderable to coun- 
terbalance many other authorities, and is, indeed, contrary 
to her fubfequent condudl:, as well as her intereft, and the 
neceflity of her fituation. It was plainly her intereft that 
the king's party ihould prevail, and nothing could have 
engaged her to ftop their progrefs, or even forbear openly 
aJTiiling them, but her intention of ftill amufipg the queen 

of 



NOTES TO THE FIFTH VOLUME. 505 

of Scots, by the hopes of being peaceably reftored to hct 
throne. See farther, Strype, vol. ii. Append, p. 20. 



NOTE CQ^], p. 243. 

'T'HAT the queen*s negotiations for marrying the duke 
^ of Anjou were not feigned nor political, appears clearly 
from many circumftances ; particularly from a paffagc in 
Dr. Forbes's manufcript collections, at prefent in the pof- 
fcffion of lord Royfton. She there enjoins Walfingham, 
before he opens the treaty, to examine the perfon of the 
duke ; and as that prince had lately recovered from the 
fmall-pox, (he defires her ambaffador to confider, whether 
he yet retained fo much of his good looks, as that a woman 
could fix her afFeftions on him. Had (he not been in 
earned, and had (he only meant to amufe the public, or 
the court of France, this circumdance was of no moment. 



NOTE [R], p. 26s. 

TN*EWES, p. 328. The puritanical feft had indeed 
-•^ gone fo far, that a book of difcipline was fecretly 
fubfcribed by above five hundred clergymen ; and the pref- 
byterian government thereby eftabliflied in the midft of the 
church, notwithftanding the rigour of the prelates and of 
the high commiflion. So impoflible is it by penal ilatutes, 
however fevere, to fupprefs all religious innovation. See 
Neal's Hift. of the Puritans, vol, i. p. 483. Strype's Life 
of Whitgift, p. 291. 



NOTE [S], p. 267. 

♦TpHIS year the earl of Northumberland, brother to the 
•■• earl beheaded fome years before, had been engaged in 
a confpiracy with lord Paget for the deliverance of the 
queen of Scots. He was thrown into the Tower ; and 
being confcious that his guilt could be proved upon him, 
at leaft that fentence would infallibly be pronounced againft 
him, he freed himfelf from farther profecution by a volun- 
tary death. He fhot himfelf in the bread with a pidoL 
About the fame time the earl of Arundel^ fon of the un- 
6 fortunate 



5o<J NOTES TO THE FIFTH VOLUME. 

fortunate duke of Norfolk, having entered into fome ex- 
ceptionable meafures, and refle£ling on the unhappy fate 
■which had attended his family, endeavoured to depart fe- 
cretly beyond fea, but was difcovered and thrown into the 
Tower. In 1587, this nobleman was brought to his trial 
for high treafon ; chiefly becaufe he had dropped fome ex- 
preiTions of affection to the Spaniards, and had affirmed 
that he v/ould have maffes faid for the fuccels of the Ar- 
mada. His peers found him guilty of treafon : This 
fevere fentence was ,not executed ; but Arundel never re- 
covered his liberty. He died a prifoncr in 1595. He 
carried his religious aulterities fo far, that they were be- 
lieved the immediate caufe of his death. 



M 



NOTE [Tj, p. 282. 

'ARY's extreme animofity againft Elizabeth may 
eafily be conceived, and it broke out about this time 
in an incident which may appear curious. While the 
former queen was kept in cuflody by the earl of Shrewf- 
bury, (he lived during a long time in great intimacy with 
the countefs ; but that lady entertaining a jealoufy of an 
amour between her and the earl, their friendfliip was con- 
verted into enmity ; and Mary took a method of revenge, 
which at once gratified her fpite againft the countefs and 
that againft Elizabeth. She wrote to the queen, inform- 
ing her of all the malicious fcandalous ftories which, fhe 
faid, the countefs of Shrewft)ury had reported of her : 
That Elizabeth had given a promife of marriage to 
a certain perfcn, whom (he afterwards often admitted 
to her bed : That (he had been equally indulgent to Si- 
mier the French agent, and to the duke of Anjou : That 
Hatton was alfo one of her paramours, who was even dif- 
gufted with her exceffive love and fondnefs : That though 
{he was, on other occafions, avaricious to the laft degree, 
as well as ungrateful, and kind to very few, Ihe fpared no 
expence in gratifying her amorous paffions : That not- 
withftanding her licentious amours, (he was not made like 
other women ; and all thofe who courted her marriage 
would in the end be difappointed : That flie was fo con- 
ceited of her beauty^ as to fwallow the moft extravagant 
flattery from her courtiers, who could not, on thefe occa- 
fsons, forbear even fneering at her for her folly : That it 

was 



NOTES TO THE FIFTH VOLUME. 507 

was ufual for them to tell her, that the luftre of herbeaiify 
dazzled them like that of the fmi, and they could not be- 
hold it with a fixed eye : She added, that the countefs had 
faid, that Mary's beft policy would be to engage her Ion 
to make love to the queen; nor was there any danger that 
fuch a propofal would be taken for mockery; fo ridiculous 
was the opinion which (lie had entertained of her own 
charms. She pretended that the countefs had reprefented 
her as no lefs odious in her temper than profligate in her 
manners, and abfurd in her vanity : That Ihe had fo 
beaten a young woman of the name of Scudamore, as to 
break that lady's finger ; and in order to cover over the 
matter, it was pretended that the accident had proceed-ed 
from the fall of a candleftick : That fhe had cut another 
acrofs the hand with a knife, who had been fo unfortu- 
nate as to offend her. Mary added, that the countefs 
had informed her, that Elizabeth had fuborned Rolftone 
to pretend friendfliip to her, in order to debauch her, and 
thereby throw Infamy on her rival. See Murden's State 
Papers, p. 558. This imprudent and malicious letter 
was written a very little before the dete61:ion of Mary's 
confpiracy ; and contributed, no doubt, to render the 
proceedings againft her the more rigorous. How far all 
thefe imputations againft Elizabeth can be credited, may 
perhaps appear doubtful : But her extreme fondnefs for 
Lcicefter, Hatton, and EfTex, not to"^ mention Mountjoy 
and others, with the curious paflages between her and 
admiral Seymour, contained in Haynes, render her chaftity 
very much to be fufpe6led. Her felf-concelt with regard 
to beauty, we know from other undoubted authority to 
have been extravagant. Even when {he was a very old 
woman, fhe allowed her courtiers to flatter her with regard 
to h^x excellent beauties. Birch, vol. ii. p. 442, 443. Her 
pafllonate temper may alfo be proved from many lively in- 
ftances ; and it was not unufual with her to beat her maids 
of honour. See the Sydney Papers, vol. ii. p. •:^8. The 
blow {he gave to EfTex before the privy-council is another 
inftance. There remains in the Mufeum a letter of the 
earl of Huntingdon's, in which he complains grievoufly 
of the queen's pinching his wife very forely, on account 
of feme quarrel between them. Had this princefs been 
born in a private ftation, {he would not have been very 
amiable : But her abfolute authority, at the fame time that 

5 it 



jo8 NOTES TO THE FIFTH VOLUME. 

it gave an uncontrolling fwing to her violent paflions, en» 
abled her to compenfate her infirmities by many great and 
fignal virtues. 



NOTE [UJ, p. 295. 

CAMDEN, p. 525. This evidence was that of Curie, 
her fecretary, whom (he allowed to be a very honeft 
man j and who, as well as Nau, had given proofs of his 
integrity, by keeping fo long fuch important fecrets, from 
whofe difcovery he could have reaped the greateft profit. 
Mary, after all, thought that (he had fo little reafon to com- 
plain of Curie's evidence, that fhe took care to have him 
paid a confiderable fum by her will, which {he wrote the 
day before her death. Goodall, vol. i. p. 413. Neither 
did (he forget Nau, though lefs fatisfied in other refpedts 
with his conduct* Id. ibid. 



NOTE [X], p. 29;. 

'TTHE detail of this confpiracy is to be found in a letter 
"■■ of the queen of Scots to Charles Paget, her great con- 
fident. This letter is dated the 20th of May 1566, and is 
contained in Dr. Forbes's manufcript collections, at prefent 
in the pofleflion of lord Royfton. It is a copy attefted by 
Curie, Mary's fecretary, and indorfed by lord Burleight 
What proves its authenticity beyond queftion is, that wc 
find in Murden's colleftion, p. 516, that Mary actually 
wrote that very day a letter to Charles Paget : And farther 
Ihe mentions in the manufcript letter, a letter of Charles 
Paget's of the 1 oth of April : Now we find by Murden, 
p. 506, that Charles Paget did actually write her a letter 
of that date. 

This violence of fpirit is very confiftent with Mary** 
character. Her maternal affection was too we^k to op- 
pofe the gratification of her paffions, particularly her pride, 
her ambition, and her bigotry. Her fon, having made 
fomc fruitlefs attempt to aflbciate her with him in the 
title, and having found the fcheme impr^dicable, on ^cr 

count 



NOTES TO THE FIFTH VOLUME. 50$ 

countof the prejudices of his proteftant fubje£^s, at lad 
dcfifted from that defign, and entered into an alliance with 
England, without comprehending his mother. She Was 
in fuch a rage at this undutiful behaviour, as fhe imagined 
itj that fhe wrote to queen Elizabeth, that (he no longer 
eared what became of him or herfelf in the world j the 
greateft fatisfa^iion (he could have before her death was, 
to fee him and all his adherents become a fignal example 
of tyranny, ingratitude, and impiety, and undergo the 
vengeance of God for their wickcdncfs. She would find 
in Chriftendom other heirs, and doubted not to put her 
inheritance in fuch hands as would retain the firmed hold 
of it. She cared not, after taking this revenge, what be- 
came of her body ; he quickeft death would then be the 
moft agreeable to her. And (he aflured her that| if he 
pcrfevered, Ihe would difown him for her fon, and would 
give him her maledi£lion, would difinherit him, as well of 
his prefent pofleflions as of all he could expe£l by her; 
abandoning him not only to her fubjefls to treat him as 
they had done her, but to all ftrangers to fubdue and con- 
quer him. It was in vain to employ menaces againft her : 
The fear of death or other misfortune would never induce 
her to make one ftep, or pronounce one fyllable beyond 
what (he had determined : She would rather peri(h with ho- 
nour, in maintaining the dignity to which God had raifed 
her, than degrade herfelf by the leaft pufillanimity, or a£l 
what was unworthy of her ftation and of her race. Mur- 
den, p. 566, 567. 

James faid to Courcelles, the French ambalTador, that 
he had fecn a letter under her ow» hand, in which fhe 
threatened to difinherit him, and faid that he might betake 
him to the lord(hip of Darnley •, for that was all he had 
by his father. Courcelles' Letter y a MS. of Dr. Campbell's, 
There is in Jebb, vol. ii. p. 573, a letter of hcr's, where 
(he throws out the fame menace againft him. 

We find this fcheme of feizing the king of Scots, and 
delivering him into the hands of the pope or the king of 
Spain, propofed by Morgan to Mary. See Murden, p. 525. 
A mother muft be very violent to whom one would dare 
to make fuch a propofal ; But it feems fhe afTcnted to it. 
Was not fuch a woman very capable of murdering her 
hulband, who had fo grievoufly offended her? 



510 NOTES TO THE FIFTH VbL^MEi 



NOTE [Y], p. 297. 

'T^ H E volume of State Papers, colie£led by Murden, 
■^ prove beyond controverfy, that Mary was long in 
clofe correfpondence with Babington, p. 513. 516, 532, 
533. She entertained a Uke correfpondence with Ballard, 
Morgan, and Charles Paget, and laid a fcheme with them 
for an infurfe£lion, and for the invafion of England by 
Spain, p. 528. 531. The fame papers (hew, that there 
had been a difcontinuance of Babington's correfpondence, 
agreeably to Camdert'aijiarration. See State Papers, p> 513* 
where Morgan recommends it to queen Mary to renew her 
correfpondence with Babington. Thefe circumflances 
prove, that no weight can be laid on Mary's denial of 
guilt, and that her correfpondence with Babington con- 
tained particulars which could not be avowed. 



NOTE [Z], p. 297. 

•THERE are three fuppofitions by which the letter toif 
* Babington may be accounted for without allowing 
Mary's concurrence in the confpiracy for aflaffinating 
Elizabeth. The firfl is, that which (he feems herfelf to 
have embraced, that her fecretaries had received Babing- 
ton's letter, and had, without any treacherous intention, 
ventured of themfelves to anfwer it, and had never com- 
municated the matter to her : But it is utterly improbable, 
if not impofliblc, that a princefs of fo much fenfe and 
fpirit fhould, in an affair of that importance, be fo treated 
by her fervants who lived in the houfe M'ith her, and who 
had every moment an opportunity of communicating the 
fecret to her. If the confpiracy failed, they mufl expe£l 
to fuffer the fevered punlfhment from the court of Eng- 
land •, if it fucceeded, the lighteft puni{|;»ment which they 
could hope for from their own millrefs, mud be difgrace 
on account of their temerity. Not to mention, that 
Mary's concurrence was in fome degree requifite for ef- 
fe£ling the defign of her efcape ; it was propofed to at* 
tack her guards while (he was employed in hunting : She 

muft 



NOTES TO THE FIFTH VOLUME. 511 

muft therefore concert the time and place with the con- 
fpirators. The fccond fuppofition is, that thcfe two fetre- 
taries were previoufly traitors; and being gnined by Wal- 
fingham, had made fuch a reply in their mi (Irefs's cypher 
as might involve her in the guilt of the confpiracy. But 
thefe two men had lived long with the queen. of Scots, 
had been entirely trufted by her, and had never fallen under 
fufpicion either with her or her partifans. Camden in- 
forms us, that Curie afterwards claimed a reward from 
Walfingham on pretence of fome promife ; but Walling- 
ham told him that he owed him no reward, and that he 
had made no difcoveries on his .examination, which were 
not known with certainty from other quarters. The third 
fuppofition is, that neither the queen nor the two fecrc- 
taries, Nau and Curie, ever faw Babington's letter, or 
made any anfwer; but that Walfingham having deciphered 
the former, forged a reply. But this fuppofition implies 
the falfehood of the whole flory, told by Camden, of 
Gifford's accefs to the queen of Scots' family, and Paulct's 
refufal to concur in allowing her fervants to be bribed. 
Not to mention, that as Nau's and Curie's evidence muft, 
on this fuppofition, have been extorted by violence and 
terror, they would necefiarily have been engaged, for 
their own juftification, to have told the truth afterwards; 
efpecially upon the acceffion of James. But Camden in- 
forms us, that Nau, even after that event, perfilted ftill 
in his teftimony. 

We muft alfo confider, that the two laft fuppofitions 
imply fuch a monftrous criminal condu6l in Walfingham, 
and confequently in Elizabeth (for the matter could be no 
fecret to her), as exceeds all credibility. If we confider 
the (ituation of things, and the prejudices of the times, 
Mary's confenf to Babington's confpiracy appears much 
more natural and probable. She believed Elizabeth to be 
an ufurper and a heretic : She regnrded her as a perfonal 
and a violent enemy : She knew that fchemes for airaft!- 
nating heretics were very familiar in that age, and gene- 
rally approved of^by the court of Rome and the zealous ca- 
tholics : Her own liberty and fovereignty were connected 
with the fuccefs of this enterprize : And it cannot appear 
ftrange, that where men, of fo much merit as Babington, 
could be engaged by bigotry alone, in fo criminal an enter- 
prize, Mary, who was aftuated by the fame motive, joined 

to 



$12 NOTES TO THE FIFTH VGLURIEi 

to fo many others, (hould have given her confent to a fcheme 
projefted by her friends. We may be previoufly certain, 
that if fuch a fcheme was ever communicated to her, with 
any probability of fuccefs, (he would aflent to it : And it 
ferved the purpofe of Walfingham and the Englifli miniftry 
to facilitate the communication of thefe fchemes, as foon 
as they had gotten an expedient for intercepting her an« 
fwer, and detefting the confpiracy. Now Walfingham's 
knowledge of the matter is a fuppofition neceflary to ac- 
count for the letter delivered to Babington. 

As to the not puniihing of Nau and Curie by Elizabeth, 
it never is the praftice to punifh lefler criminals, who had 
given evidence againd the principal. 

But what ought to induce us to reje<^ thefe three fup" 
poiitions is, that they mufl all of them be conhdered as 
bare poflibilities : The partifans of Mary can give no rea- 
jTon for preferring one to the other : Not the flighted evi- 
dence ever appeared to fupport any one of them : Neither 
at that time, nor at any time afterwards, was any reafon 
diicovered, by the numerous zealots at home and abroad, 
who had embraced Mary's defence, to lead us to the belief 
of any of thefe three fuppofitions ; and even her apologias 
at prefent feem not to have fixed on any choice among thefe 
fuppofed poflibilities. The pofitive proof of two very cre- 
dible witnefles, fupported by the other very ftrong circum- 
ftances, ftill remains unimpeached. Babington, who had 
an extreme intereft to have communication with the queen 
of Scots, believed he had found a means of correfpond- 
cnce with her, and had received an anfwer from her : 
He, as well as the other confpirators, died in that belief ; 
There has not occurred, fince that time, the leafl: argu- 
ment to prove that they were miftaken: Can there be 
any reafon at prefent to doubt the truth of their opinion ? 
Camden, though a profeft apologifl for Mary, is conftrain- 
ed to tell the ftory in fuch a manner as evidently fuppofes 
her guilt, Such was the impoffibility of finding any other 
confident account, even by a man of parts who was a con- 
temporary ! 

In this light might the queftion have appeared even du* 
ring Mary's trial. But what now puts her guilt beyond 
all controverfy is the following paflage of her letter to 
Thomas Morgan, dated the 27th of July 1586. " As to 
•« Babington, he hath both kindly and honeftly offered 

»' himfelf 



NOTES TO THE FIFTH VOLUME. 51;, 

*f himfelf and all his means to be employiscl any way I 
*' would ; Whereupon I hope to have fatisfied him by two 
** of my feveral letters fmce I had his ; and the rather, 
**^ for that I opened him the way, whereby I received his 
*' with your aforefaid." Murden, p. 533. Babingcon 
confefled, that he had offered her to ad'ainnate the queen : 
It appears by this that (he had accepted the oifer : So that 
all the fuppofitions of Walfnigham's forgery, or the te* 
merity or treachery of her fecretaries, fall to the ground. 



NOTE [AA], p. 301. 

^*T^HIS parliament granted the queen a fupply of a fub* 
"*• fidy and two fifteenths. They adjourned, and met 
again after the execution of the queen of Scots j when 
they pafled fome remarkable incidents, which it may be 
proper not to omit. We fliall give them in the words of 
fir Simon D'Ewes, p. 4x0, 411. which are almoft wholly 
tranfcribed from Townfhend's Journal. On Monday the 
27th of February, Mr. Cope, firfl; ufing fome fpeechea 
touching the necefTity of a leirned miniftry, and the 
amendment of things amifs in the ecclefiaftical eftate, of- 
fered to the houfe a bill and a book written ; the bill con- 
taining a petition that it might be enabled, that all laws 
now in force touching ecclefiaftical government (hould be 
void : And that it might be ena6ted, that that book o^ 
common prayer now offered, and none other, might be 
received into the church to be ufed. The book contained 
the form of prayer and adminillration of the facraments, 
with divers rites and ceremonies to be ufed in the church j 
aT)d he defired that the book might be read. Whereupon 
Mr. Speaker in effeft ufed this fpeech : For that her ma- 
jefty before thi§ time had commanded the houfe not to 
meddle with this matter, and that her majefty had pro- 
mifed to take order in thofe caufes, he doubted not but to 
the good fatisfa£lion of all her people, he defired that it 
would pleafe them to fpare the reading of it. Notwithdand- 
ing the houfe defired the reading of it. Whereupon Mr. 
Speaker defired the clerk to read. And the court being 
ready to read it, Mr. Dalton made a motion againfl; th? 
leading of it; faying, that it was not meet to be read, 
Vofe. V, LI and 



514 NOTES TO THE FIFTH VOLUIVTE. 

and it did appoint a new form of adminiftration of the 
facraments and ceremonies of the church, to the difcredit 
of the book of common prayer, and of the whole ftate ; 
and thought that this dealing would bring her majefty's in- 
dignation againft the houfe, thus to enterprife this dealing 
with thofe things which her majefty efpecially had taken 
into her own charge and direction. Whereupon Mr. 
Lewkenor fpake, fhewing the neceflity of preaching and 
of a learned miniftry, and thought it very fit that the 
petition and book (hould be read. To this purpofe fpakc 
Mr. Hurlefton and Mr. Bainbrigg ; and fo, the time being 
paflcd, the houfe broke up, and neither the petition nor 
book read. This done, her majefty fent to Mr. Speaker, 
as well for this petition and book, as for that other petition 
and book for the like efFe6l, that was delivered the laft 
feffion of parliament, which Mr. Speaker fent to her ma- 
jefty. On Tuefday the 28th of February, her majefty 
fent for Mr. Speaker, by occafion whereof the houfe did 
not fit. On Wednefday the firft day of March, Mr. 
Wentworih delivered to Mr. Speaker certain articles, 
which contained queftions touching the liberties of the 
houfe, and to fome of v.'hich he was to anfwer, and de- 
fired they might be read. Mr. Speaker defired him to 
fpare his motion, until her majefty's pleafure was further 
known touching the petition and book lately delivered into 
the houfe ; bui Mr. Wentworth would not be fo fatisfied, 
but required his articles might be read, Mr. Wentworth 
introduced his queries by lamenting, that he as well as 
many others were deterred from fpeaking, by their want 
of knowledge and experience in the liberties of the houfe; 
and the queries were as follow: Whether this council 
' were not a place for any member of the fame here aflem- 

bled, freely and without controulment of any perfon or 
danger of laws, by bill or fpeech to utter any of the griefs 
of this commonwealth whatfoever, touching the fervice of 
God, the fafety of the prince and this noble realm ? Whe- 
ther that great honour may be done unto God, and benefit 
and fervice unto the prince and ftate, without free fpeech 
in this council that may be done with it .^ Whether there 
be any council which can make, add, or diminifh from the 
laws of the realm, but only this council of parliament ? 
Whether it be not againft the ordefs of this council to make 
any lecret or matter of weight, which'is here in hand, known 



NOTES TO THE FIFTH VOLUME. 

to the prince, or any other, concerning the high fervice of 
God, prince or ftate, without the confent of the houfe ? 
Whether the fpeaker or any other may interrupt any mem- 
ber of this council in his fpeech ufed in this houfe tending 
to any of the forenamed fervices? Whether the fpeaker 
may rife when he will, any matter being propounded, with- 
out confent of the houfe or not ? Whether the fpeaker may 
over-rule the houfe in any matter or caufe there in queftion, 
or whether he is to be ruled or over- ruled in any matter 
or not ? Whether the prince and ftate can continue, and 
ftand, and be maintained, without this council of parlia- 
ment, not altering the government of the ftate ? At the 
end of thefe queftions, fays fir Simon D'Ewes, I found 
fet down this fliort note or memorial enfuing j by which 
it may be perceived, both what ferjeant Puckering, the 
fpeaker, did with the faici queftiolis after he had received 
them, and what became alfo of this bufinefs, viz. *' Thefe 
*^ queftions Mr. Puckering pocketed up and fliewed fir 
•* Thomas Henage, who fo handled the matter that Mr. 
** Wentworth went to the Tower, and the queftions not 
** at all moved. Mr. Buckler of Eflex herein brake his 
" faith in forfaking the matter, &c. and no more was 
** done." After fetting down, continues fir Simon 
D'Ewes, the faid bufinefs of Mr. Wentworth in the ori- 
ginal journal book, there follows only this ftiort conclu- 
fion of the day itfelf, viz. " This day, Mr. Speaker beinigj 
*' fent for to the queen's majefty, the houfe departed.'* 
On Thurfday the fecond of March, Mr. Cope, Mr. 
Lewkenor, Mr. Hurlefton, and Mr. Bainbrigg, were fent 
for to my lord chancellor, and by divers of the privy 
council, and from thence were fent to the Tower. On 
Satu.rday the fourth day of March, fir John Higharu 
made a motion to this houfe, for that divers good and 
neceflary members thereof were taken from them, that it 
would pleafe them to be humble petitioners to her majefty 
for the reftitution of them again to this houfe. To which 
fpeeches Mr. Vice-chamberlain anfwered, that if the gen- 
tlemen were committed for matter within the compafs of 
the privilege of the houfe, then there might be a petition ; 
but if not, then we fliould give occafion to her majefty's 
farther difpleafure: And therefore advifed to ftay until they 
heard more, which could not be long : And farther he 
faid» touchfng the book and the petition, her majefty had, 

LI i for 



SiS 



5«6 NOTES TO THE FIFTH VOLUME. 

for divers good caufes bed known to herfclf, thought fit to 
fupprefs the fame, without any farther examination there- 
of j and yet thought it very unfit for her majefty to give 
any account of her doings. — But, whatfocver Mr. Vice- 
chamberlain pretended, it is moft probable thefe members 
were committed for intermeddling with matters touching 
the church, which her majefty had often inhibited, and 
which had caufed fo much dlfputatlon and fo many meet- 
ings between the two houfes the Jaft parliament. 

This is all we find of the matter in fir Simon D'Ewes 
and Townfhend ; and it appears that thofe members who 
had been committed, were detained in cuftody till the queen 
thought proper to releafe them. Thefe queftions of Mto 
Wentworth are curious ; becaufe they contain fome faint 
dawn of the prefent Englifh conftitution -, though fuddenly 
eclipfed by the arbitrary government of Elizabeth. Went- 
worth was indeed, by his puritanifm, as well as his love of 
liberty (for thefe two characters of fuch unequal merit 
arofe and advanced together), the true forerunner of the 
Hambdens, the Pyms, and the Hollifes, who in the next 
age, with lefs courage, becaufe with lefs danger, rendered 
their principles fo triumphant. I fhall only aflc, whether 
it be not fufRciently clear from all thefe tranfadlions, that 
in the two fucceeding reigns it was the people who en- 
croached upon the fovereign ; not the fovereign who at- 
tempted, as is pretended, to ufurp upon the people ? 



iSIOTE [BB], p. 338. 

CJ^H E qiieetis fpeech in the camp of Tilbury luas in thefe 
-* luorJs: My loving people, we have been perfuaded by 
fome, that are careful of our fafcty, to take heed how 
we commit ouifelves to armed multitudes, for fear of 
treachery ; but alTure you, I do not defire to live to dif- 
truft my faithful and loving people. Let tyrants fear ; I 
have always fo behaved myfelf, that, under God, I have 
placed my chieftft ftrength and fafeguard in the loyal 
hearts and good-will of my fubjeds. And therefore I am 
come amongft you at this time, not as for my recreation or 
fport, but being refolved, in the mid ft and heat of the 
battle, to live or die amongft you alU to iay down, for my 

God, 



NOTES TO THE FIFTH VOLUME. $tj 

God, and for my kingdom, and for my people, my honour 
and my blood, even in the duft. I know 1 have but the 
body of a weak and feeble woman, but 1 have the heart of 
a king, and of a king of England too ; and think foul 
fcorn that Parma or Spain, or any prince of Europe, fhould 
dare to invade the borders of my realms: To which, ra- 
ther than any diftionour (hould grow by me, I myfclf will 
take up arms; 1 myfelf will be your general, judge, and 
rewarder of every one of your virtues in the field. 1 know 
already, by your forwardncfs, that you have deferved re- 
wards and crowns; and we do aflure you, on the word of 
a prince, they fhall be duly paid you. In the mean time 
my lieutenant-general fhall be in my (lead, than whom 
never prince commanded a more noble and worthy fub-» 
jc6l ; not doubting by your obedience to my general, by 
your concord in the camp, and your valour in the field, we 
ihall (hortly have a famous victory over thofe enemies of 
sny God, of my kingdom, and of my people. 



NOTE [CC], p. 345. 

CTRYPE, vol. iii. p. 525. On the fourth of Septem* 
^ ber, foon after the difperfion of the Spanifli Armada, 
died the earl of Leicefter, the queen's great, but unworthy 
favourite. Her aftV£lion for him continued to the laft. 
He had difcovered no condu£l in any of his military en- 
terprifes, and was fufpefled of cowardice ; yet {he in- 
truded him with the command of her armies during the 
danger of the Spanifh invafion; a partiality which might 
have proved fatal to her, had the duke of Parma been abl$ 
to land his troops in England. She had even ordered a 
commiifion to be drawn for him, conflitutlng him hey 
lieutenant in the kingdoms of England and Ireland; but 
Burleigh and Hatton reprefented to her the danger of in- 
truding fuch unlimited authority in the hands of any fub-» 
jecl, and prevented the execution of that defign. Na 
wonder that a conduct fo unlike the uf\ial jealoufy of Eli- 
7abeth, gave reafon to fufpe6l that her partiality was 
founded on fome other paflion than friendlhip. But Eli- 
zabeth feemed to carry her afFedion to Leiccder no far- 
ther than the grave ; She ordered his goods to be difpofed 

L 1 3 oi 



51 8 NOTES TO THE FIFTH VOLUME. 

oi at a public falf*, in order to reimburfe herfelf of feme 
^ debt which he owed her ; and her yfual attention to mo- 

ney was obferved to prevail over her regard to the memory 
ef the deceafed. This earl was a great hypocrite, a pre- 
tender to the ftricleft religion, an encouragcr of the pu- 
ritans, and a founder of hofpitals. 



NOTE [DD], p. 345. 

CTRYPE, vol. iii. p. 542. Id. Append, p. 239. There 
*^ ard fome fingnlar paflages in this laft fpeech, which 
may be worth taking notice of; efpecially as they came 
from a member who was no courtier ; for he argues againft 
the fubfidy; " And firft," f^ys he, " for the necejfitj 
** thereof I cannot deny, but if it were a charge impofed 
** upon us by her majefty's commandment, or a demand 
•' proceeding from her majefly by way of requeft, that I 
** think there is not one among us all, either fo difobedient 
** a fubjeft in regard of our duty, or fo unthankful a man 
** in refpeft of the ineftimable benefits which, by her or 
** from her, we have received, which would not M-ith frank 
** confcnt, both of voice and heart, moll willingly fubmit 
'* hnnfelf thereunto, without any unreverend enquiry into 
** the caufes thereof; for it is continually in the mouth of 
** us all, that our lands, goods, and lives, are at our 
'* prince's difpofing. And it agreeth very well with that 
** pofition of the civil law, which fayeth, ^lod omnia regis 
*' Junt. But how ? Ita tamen tit omnium fmt. Ad regetn 
** enim potejlas omnium pertinet ; adjingtdos proprieias. So 
** that although it mull be true that her majefty hath over 
'* ourfflves and our goods, poteflatetn imperandi ; yet it is 
** true, that until that power command (which, no doubt, 
** will not command v>;thout very ju ft caufe), every fub- 
** jeft hath his own proprietatetji poJ[idendt. Which power 
*' and commandment from her majelty, which we have 
*' not yet received, 1 take it (faving reformation) that we 
** are freed from the caufe ot neccjjiiy. And the caufe of 
" neceffity is the dangerous eftatc of the commonwealth," 
&c The tenor of the fpeech pleads rather for a general 
fceiievoknce than a fubfidy ; for the law of Richard III, 
apamft benevolence was never conceived to have any 

force. 



NOTES TO THE FIFTH VOLUME. 

force. The member even proceeds to aflcrt with feme 
precaution, that it was in tlie power of a parliament to re- 
fufe the king's demand of a fubfidy ; and that there was 
an inftance of that hbevty in Henry 111,'s time, near four 
hundred years before, Subjifie. 



NOTE [EE], p. 348. 

XTl/E may judge of the extent and importance of thefe 
* '^ abufes by a fpeech of Bacon's agiiinft purveyors, de- 
livered in the firft feflion of the firfl parliament of the fub- 
fequent reign, by which alfo we may learn, that Elizabeth 
had given no redrefs to the grievainces complained of, 
** Firft," fays he, " they take in kind what they ought 
** not to take ; fecondly, they take in quantity a far 
** greater proportion than cometh to your majefty's ufe ; 
** thirdly, they take in an unlawful manner, in a manner, 
*' I fay, direftly and exprefsly prohibited by the feveral 
** laws. For the firft, I am a little to alter their name ; 
** for inftead of takers they become taxers : Inftead of 
" taking provifions for your majefty's iervice, they tax 
*' your people ad redimendam vexationem ,• impofmg upon. 
<' them and exorting from them divers fums of money, 
^< fometimcs in grofs, fometimes in the nature of ftipends 
'* annually paid, ne noceanty to be freed and eafed of their 
*' oppreflion. Again, they take trees, which by law they 
** cannot do ; timber trees, which are the beauty, coun- 
*' tenance, and {i\elter of men's houfes ; thu men hav§ 
*< long fpared from their own purle and profit j that men 
" efteem for their ufe and delight, above ten times the 
** value ; that are a lofs which men cannot repair or recover, 
*« Thefe do they take, to the defacing and fpoiling of your 
^' fubjedts manfions and dwellings, except they may be 
'* compounded with to their own appetites. And if id, 
** gentleman be too hard for them while he is at home, 
«* they will watch their time when there is but a baili^ 
** or a fervant remaining, and put the axe to the root of 
*' the tree, ere ever the mafter can ftop it. Again, they 
" ufe a ftrange and moft unjuft exadlion in caufing the 
'? fubjefts to pay poundage of their own debts, due from 
*« your majefty unto them ; fo as a poor man when he 

L 1 4 ** has 



t'9 



529 



NOTES TO THE FIFTH VOLUME, 



has had his hay, or his wood, or his poultry (which per-^ 
chance he was full loath to part with, and had for the 
provifion of his own family, and not to put to fale) taken 
from him, and that not a juft price, but under the 
value, and cometh to receive his money, he (hall have 
after the rate of twelve-pence in the pound abated 
for poundage of his due payment upon fo hard condi- 
tions. Nay, farther, they are grown to that extremity 
(as is affirmed, though it be fcarce credible, fave that 
in fuch perfons all things are credible), that they will 
take double poundage, once when the debenture is made, 
and again the fecond time, when the money is paid. 
For the fecond point, moft gracious fovereign, touching 
the quantity which they take far above that which is 
anfwered to your mnjefty's ufe j it is alHrmed unto me 
by divers gentlemen of good report, as a matter which 
I may fafely avouch unto your majefly, that there is no 
pound profit which redoundeth unto your majefty in this 
courfe, but induceth and begetteth three pound damage 
upon your fubjefts, bi;nd(* the difcontentm.ent. And to 
the end they may make their fpoil more fecurely, what 
do they ? Whereas divers ftatutes do ftridly provide, 
that whatfoever they take fhall be regiftered and atteft- 
ed, to the end that by making a collation of that which 
is taken from the country and that which is anfwered 
above, their deceits might appear, they, to the end to 
obfcure their deceits, utterly omit the obfervation of 
this, which the law prefcribeth. And therefore to de-» 
fcenclj if it may pleafe your majefty, to the third fort of 
abufe, ^vhich is of the unlawful manner of their taking, 
whereof this queftion is a branch ; it is fo manifold, as 
it rather afketh an enumeration of fome of the particulars 
than a profecution of all. For their price, by law they 
ought to take as they can agree with the fubje£t ; by 
abufe, they take at an impofed and enforced price : By 
law, they ought to take but one apprizement by neigh- 
bours in the country ; by abufe, they make a fecond 
apprizement at the court gate ; and when the fubje£ls 
cattle come up many miles, lean and out of plight by 
reafon of their travel, then they prize them anew at an 
abated price : By law, they ought to take between fun 
and fun -, by abufe, they take by twilight and in the 
|iight-time, a time well chofen (or malefa^ors ; By law, 

** they 



NOTES TO THE FIFTH VOLUME. 521 

** they ought not to take in the highlvays (a place by her 
<^* majefty's Iiigli prerogative protected, and by llatute by 
'* fpeclal words excepted); by abufe, they take in the 
t-* highways : By law, they ought to fliew their commiC- 
** fion, &c. A number of other particulars there are, 
*( &c." Bacon's Works, vol. iv. p. 305, 306. 

Such were the abufes which Elizabeth would neither 
permit her parliaments to meddle with, nor redrefs hcrfelf, 
I believe it will readily be allowed, that this flight prero- 
gative alone, which has pafled almoft unobferved amidft. 
other branches of fo much greater importance, was fuffi- 
eient to extinguifh all regular liberty. For what ele<Slor, 
or member of parliament, or even juryman, durfl oppofe 
the will of the court, -while he lay under the lafh of fuch 
an arbitrary prerogative. For a farther account of the 
grievous and incredible oppreflions of purveyors, fee the 
Journals of the Houfe of Commons, vol. i. p. 190. There 
is a llory of a carter vi'hich may be worth mentioning on 
this occafion. *' A carter had three times been at Wind- 
*' for with his cart to carry away, upon fummons of a re- 
*' move, fome part of the (luff of her majefty's wardrobe; 
«* and when he had repaired thither once, twice, and the 
•* third time, and that they of the wardrobe had told him 
** the third time that the remove held not, the carter, 
•* clapping his hand on his thigh, faid, Noiu I fee that 
** the queen is a ivomau as viell as my tuife. "Which words 
<* being overheard by her majefty, who then ftood at the 
*^ window, flie faid, W^at a vi//<iin is this ? and fo fent 
«* him three angels to (lop his mouth," Birch's Memoirs^ 
vol. i. p. 155, 



NOTE [FF], p. 358. 

'TpHIS year the nation fufFercd a great lofs, by the death 
-*- of fir Francis Walfmgham, fecretary of ftate; a man 
equally celebrated for his abilities and his integrity. He 
had pafled through many employments, had been very fru- 
gal in his expence, yet died fo poor, that his family was 
obliged to give him a private burial. He left only one 
daughter, firft; married to fir Philip Sidney, then to the earl 
of EflTes, favourit? of queen Elizabeth, and laiily to the 

earl, 



5a» NOTES TO THE FIFTH VOLUME. 

earl of Clanricarde of Ireland. The fame year died 
Thomas Randolph, whp had been employed by the queen 
in feveral embaffies to Scotland ; as did alfo the earl of 
Warwick, elder brother to Leicefter. 



NOTE [GG], p. 35r. 

'T*HI3 a6lion of fir Richard Greenville is fo fmgular as 
■*• to merit a more particular relation. He was engaged 
alone with the whole Spanilh fleet of fifty-three fail, which 
had ten thoufand men on board -, aud from the time the 
fight began, which was about three in the afternoon, to 
the break of next day morning, he repulfcd the enemy 
fifteen times, though they continually ftiifted their veflels, 
and boarded with frefh men. In the beginning of the ac- 
tion he himfeif received a wound ; but he continued doing 
his duty above deck till eleven at night, when receiving a 
fre(h wound, he was carried down to be drefled. During 
this operation he received a (hot in the head, and the fur- 
geon was killed by his fide. The Englifh began now to 
want powder; all their fmall arms were broken or become 
\ifelefs ; of this number, which were but a hundred and 
three at firft, forty were killed, and almoft all the reft 
wounded ; their mails were beat overboard, their tackle 
cut in pieces, and nothing but a hulk left, unable to move 
one way or other. In this fituation fir Richard propofec} 
to the (hip's company, to trull to the mercy of God, not 
to that of the Spaniards, and to deftroy the (hip with 
themfelves, rather than yield to the enemy. The mafter 
gunner, and many of the feamen, agreed to this defperate 
refolution ; but others bppofcd it, and obliged Greenville 
to furrender himfeif prifoner. He died a few days after ; 
and his laft words were : *' Here die I, Richard Green- 
** ville, with a joyful and quiet mind ; for that I have 
** ended my life as a true foldier ought to do, fighting for 
** his country, queen, religion, and honour : My foul 
«• willingly departing from this body, leaving behind the 
•* lading fame of having behaved as every valiant foldier 
<* is in his duty bound to do." The Spaniards loft in 
this fharp, though unequal a£lion, ^ur fhips, and about a 
thoufand men. And Greenville's veflel periftied foon after 

\yith 



NOTES TO THE FIFTH VOLUME. 523 

with two hundred Spaniards in her. Huckhiyt's Voyages, 
vol. ii. part 2. p. 169. Caftiden, p. ^6^. 



NOTE [HH], p. 385. 

IT is ufual for the fpeaker to difqualify himfelf for the 
"*■ office ; but the reafons employed by this fpeaker are fo 
fingular, that they may be worth tranfcribing. " My 
" eftate," faid he, " is nothing correfpondent for the 
** maintenance of this dignity ; for my father dying, left 
•f me a younger brother, and nothing to me but my bare 
•< annuity. Then growing to man's eftate, and fome 
*' fmall practice of the law, I took a wife, by whom I 
•* have had many children : the keeping of us all being a 
** great impoverifhing to my eftate, and the daily living of 
" us all nothing but my daily induftry. Neither from my 
** perfon nor my nature doth this choice arife : For he that 
•* fupplieth this place ought to be a man big and comely, 
•* ftately and well fpoken, his voice great, his carriage 
** majeftical, his nature haughty, and his purfe plentiful 
•* and heavy : But contrarily the ftature of my body is 
" fmall, myfelf not fo well fpoken, my voice low, my 
•* carriage lawyer-like, and of the common fafhion, my 
** nature foft and baftiful, my purfe thin, light, and never 
<' yet plentiful. — If Demofthenes, being fo learned and 
** eloquent ns be was, one whom none furpafied, trem- 
** bled to fpeak before Phocion at Athens ; how much 
** more fliall I, being unlearned and unfkilful to fupply 
** the place of dignity, charge and trouble, to fpeak before 
" fo many Phocions as here be ? Yea, which is the great- 
** eft, before the unfpeakable majefty and facred perfonage 
** of our dread and dear fovereign : The terror of whofe 
** countenance will appal and abafe even the ftouteft 
*' hearts i yea, whofe very name will pull down the 
«* greateft courage ? For how mightily do the eftate and 
** name of a prince dejetl the haughtieft ftomach even of 
«* their greateft fubjed ?" D'Ewes, p. 459. 



524 NOTES TO THE FIFTH VOLUME. 



NOTE [II], p. 392. 

^ABALA, p. 234. Birch's Memoirs, vol. il. p. 386* 
^^ Speed, p. 877. The whole letter of EfTex is fo cu- 
rious and fo fpirited, that the reader may not be difpleafed 
to read it. " My very good lord ; Though there is not 
<« that man this day living, whom I would fooner make 
•* judge of any queftion that might concern m» than 
*' yourfelf, yet you muft give me leave to tell you, that in 
?* feme cafes I muft appeal from all earthly judges : And 
** if any, then furely in this, when the highefl judge on 
" earth has impofed on me the heavieft punifhment, with- 
** out trial or hearing. Since then I muft either anfwer your 
•' lordfliip's argument, or elfe forfake mine own juft de» 
** fence, I will force mine aching head to do me fervice 
** for an hour. I muft firft deny my difcontent, which 
** was forced, to be an humorous difcontent; and that it 
** was unfeafonable, or is of fo long continuing, your lord- 
<' fhip (hould rather condole with me than expoftulate : 
*< Natural feafons are expe£ted here below ; but violent 
<' and urfeafoble ftorms come from above : There is no 
*' tempeft equal to the paflionate indignation of a prince; 
** nor yet at any time fo unfeafonable as when it lighteth 
** on thofe that might expe6l a harveft of their careful and 
** painful labours. He that is once wounded muft needs 
«' feel fmart till his hurt is cured, or the part hurt become 
*'« fcnfelefs : But cure I expe£l none, her majefty's heart 
*« being obdurate againft me ; and be without fenfe I can- 
** not, being of flelh and blood. But, fay you, I may 
<* aim at the end : I do more than aim ; for I fee an end 
«* of all my fortunes, I have fet an end to all my defires, 
"•'' In this courfe do 1 any thing for my enemies ? When I 
" was at court I found them abfolute j and therefore I 
*< had rather they fliould triumph alone, than have me at- 
*' tendant upon their chariots. Or do I leave my friends? 
<f "When I was a courtier, I could yield them no fruit of 
«< my love unto them ; and now that I am a hermit, they 
«♦ ftiall bear no envy for their love towards me. Or do I 
'' forfake myfelf, becaufe I do enjoy myfelf ? Or do I 
*« overthrow my fortunes^ becaufe I build not a fortune oi' 

«' papes 



NOTES TO THE FIFTH VOLUME. 5S5 

** paper wails, which every puiF of wind bloweth down ? 
** Or do I ruinate my honour, becaufe I leave following 
" the purfuit, or wearing the falfe badge or mark of the 
•* (hadow of honour ? Do I give courage or comfort to 
«* the foreign foe, becaufe I referve myfelf to encounter 
■** with him ? Or becaufe I keep ray heart from bufinefs, 
*' though I cannot keep my fortune from declining ? No, 
** no, my good lord, I give every one of thefe confidera- 
«* tions its due weight ; and the more I weigh them, the 
** more I find myfelf jullified from offending in any of 
•* them. As for the two lalt obje6tions, that I forfake my 
" country when it hath molt need of me, and fail in that 
•' indiffoluble duty which I owe to my fovereign ; I an- 
** fwer, that if my country had at this time any need of 
■* my public fervice, her majefty, that governeth it, would 
*• not have driven me to a private life. I am tied to my 
** country by two bonds ; one public, to difcharge care- 
«* fully and induftrioufly that truf!: whicli is committed to 
** me; the other private, to facrifice for it my life and 
** carcafe, which hath been nourifhed in it. Of the lirft 
*' I am free, being difmifl'ed, difcharged, and difabled by 
^* her majefty : Of the other, nothing can free me but 
** death ; and therefore no occafion of my performance 
** fhall fooner offer itfelf but I fhall meet it half way, 
«* The indifToluble duty which I owe unto her majefly, 
** is only the duty of allegiance, which I never have, nor 
"* never can fail in : The duty of attendance is no indif- 
** foluble duty. I owe her majefty the duty of an earl, and 
** of lord marfhal of England. I have been content to 
*' do her majefty the fervice of a clerk ; but I can never 
** ferve her as a villain or Have. But yet you fay I mult 
•' give way unto the time. So I do ; for now that I fee 
** the ftorm come, T have put myfelf into the harbour. 
** Seneca faith, we muft give way to fortune : 1 know that 
•* fortune is both blind and flrong, and therefore I go as 
" far as I can out of her way. You faythe remedy is 
*' not to ftrive : I neither flrive nor feek for remedy. 
** But you f.iy, I muft yield and fubmit ; I can neither 
*' yield myfelf to be guilty, nor allow the imputation lai4 
" upon me to be juft ; I owe fo much to the Author of all 
** truth, as I can never yield truth to be falfehood, nor 
*♦ falfehood to be truth. Have I given caufe, you afk ; 
** and yet take a fcandal when I have done ? No ; I gave 

S •* n© 



J25 



NOTES TO THE FIFTH VOLUME. 



«* no caufe, not fo much as Fimbria's complaint againft 
*' me ; for I did totiim telum corpore recipere : Receive the 
•• whole fword into my body. I patiently bear all, and 
** fenfibly feel all that I then received when this fcandal 
** was given me. Nay more, when the vilefl; of all in- 
" dignities are done unto me," &c. This noble letter 
Bacon afterwards, in pleading againfl: Eflex, called bold 
and prefumptuous, and derogatory to her majefty. Birch's 
Memoirs, vol. ii. p. 388. 



NOTE [KK], p. 420. 

TV/TOST of queen Elizabeth's courtiers feigned love and 
^^ defire towards her, and addrefled themfelves to her 
in the ftyle of paffion and gallantry. Sir Walter Raleigh, 
having fallen into difgrace, wrote the following letter to 
his friend fir Robert Cecil, with a view, no doubt, of 
having It (hewn to the queen. *' My heart was never 
broke till this day, that I hear the queen goes away fo 
far off, whom I have followed fo many years, with fo 
great love and defire, in fo many journeys, and am 
now left behind her in a dark prifon all alone. While 
(he was yet near at hand, that I might hear of her once 
in two or three days, my forrows were the lefs ; but even 
now my heart is cad into the depth of all mifery. I, 
that was w.ont to behold her riding like Alexander, 
hunting like Diana, walking like Venus, the gentle 
wind blowing her fair hair about her pure cheeks, like 
a nymph, fometimes fitting in the fliade like a goddefs, 
fometimes fmging like an angel, fometimes playing like 
Orpheus ; behold the forrow of this world ! once amifs 
hath bereaved me of all. O glory, that only (hineth in 
misfortune ! what is become of thy aflurance } All 
wounds have fears but that of fantafy : All afFettions 
their relenting but that of womankind. Who is the 
judge of friendfhip but adverfity, or when is grace wit- 
nefTed but in offences ? There were no divinity but by 
rcafon of compaffion ; for revenges are brutifh and 
mortal. All thofe times pail, the loves, the fighs, the 
forrows, the defires, cannot they weigh down one frail 
misfortune f Cannot one drop of gall be hid in fo great 

*< heaps 



NOTES TO THE FIFTH VOLUME, 

" heaps of fweetnefs ? 1 may then conclude, Spes ^for* 
" tuna, valete. She is gone in whom I trufled ; and of me 
** hath not one thought of mercy, nor any refpedl of that 
*' which was. Do with me now therefore what you Hft. 
** I am more weary of Hfe thatt they are defirous I (hould 
** periih ; which if it had been for her, as it is by her, I 
** had been too happily born." Murden, 657. It is to 
be remarked that this nymph, Venus, goddefs, angel, was 
then about fixty. Yet five or fix years after (he allowed 
the fame language to be held to her. Sir Henry Unton, 
Iier ambaflador in France, relates to her a converfation 
which he had with Henry IV. The monarch, after hav- 
ing introduced Unton to his miftrefs, the fair Gabrielle, 
afked him how he liked her ? " I anfwered fparingly ia 
*' her praife," faid the minifter, " and told him, that if, 
** without offence, I might fpeak it, I had the picture of 
*» a far more excellent rr.iftrefs, and yet did her pidlurc 
«« come far ihort of her perfedtion of beauty. As you 
«« love me, faid he, (hew it me if you have it about you. 
« I made fome difliculties ; yet, upon his importunity, 
« offered it to his view very fecretly, holding it flill in 
« my hand : He beheld it with paflion and admiration, 
<« faying that I had reafon, Je me rends, protefting that he 
*< had never feen the like -, fo, with great reverence, he 
« kifled it twice or thrice, I detaining it flill in- my hand. 
<' In the end, with fome kind of contention, he took it 
" from me, vowing that I might take my leave of it ; 
<* for he would not forego It for any treafure : And that 
** to poflefs the favour of the lively pi6lure, he Vvould for- 
«« fake all the world, and hold himfelf mofl happy ; with 
«* many other mofl paffionate fpeeches." Murden, p. 718. 
For farther particulars on this head, fee the ingenious au- 
thor of the Catalogue of royal and noble Authors, article 
Effex. 



•NOTE [LL], p. 441= 
I 
iT'may not be amlfs to fubjoln fome prifTigcs of thefe 
"■■ fpeeches ; which may ferve to give us a jufi idea of the 
government of that age, and of the political principles 
which prevailed during the reign of Elizabeth. Mr. Lau- 
lence Hyde propofed a bill, entitled, An acl for the ex- 
6 pi a nation 



S^l 



$zt NOTES TO THE FIFTH VOLUME. 

planatlon bf the common law in certain cafts of lettefS 
patent. Mr. Spicer faid, This bill may touch the prero- 
gative royal, which, as I learned the laft parliament, is fo 

tranfcendant, that the of the fubjeft may not afpire 

thereunto. Far be it therefore from me, that the ftate and 
prerogative royal of the prince (hould be tied by me, or 
by the a£t of any other fubje£l. Mr. Francis Bacon faidj 
As to the prerogative royal of the prince, for my own 
part, I ever allowed of it j and it is fuch as 1 hope will 
never be difcufled. The queen, as fhe is our fovereign, 
hath both an elarging and reftrainiiig power. For by 
her prerogative (he may fet at liberty things rellrained by 
(latute law or otherwife, and fecondly, by her prerogative 
(lie may reflrain things which be at liberty. For the firft, 
{he may grant a fian ohjiante contrary to the penal laws.— 
With regard to monopolies, and fuch like cafes, the cafe 
hath ever been to humble ourfelves unto her majefty, and 
by petition dcfire to have our grievances remedied, efpe- 
cially when the remedy toucheth her fo nigh in point of 
prerogative. — I fiiy, and I fay it again, that we ought not 
tp deal, to judge, or meddle with her majefty's preroga- 
tive. I wifli therefore every man to be careful of this 
bufinefs. Pr. Bennet faid. He that goeth about to debate 
her majefty's prerogative had need to walk warily, Mr* 
Laurence Hyde faid. For the bill itfclf, I made it, and I 
think I underftand it : And far be it from this heart 
of mine to think, this tongue to fpeak, or this hand to 
write any thing either in prejudice or derogation of her 
majefty's prerogative-royal and the ftate. — Mr. Speaker, 
quoth jerjeant Harris, for ought I fee, the.houfe moveth 
to have this bill in the nature of a petition ; it muft: 
then begin with more humiliation. And truly, fir, the 
bill is good of itfclf, but the penning of it is lomewhat 
out of courfe. Mr. Montague faid, the matter is good and 
honeft, and I like this maniaer of proceeding by bill well 
enough in this matter. The grievances are great, and I 
would note only unto you thus much, that the laft parlia- 
ment we proceeded by way of petition, which had no 
fuccefsful efte(Si:. Mr. Francis More faid, I know the 
queen's prerogative is a thing curious to be dealt withal : 
Yet all grievances are not comparable. I cannot utter 
with ray tongue, or conceive with my heart, the great 
grievances that the town and country, for which I ferve, 

fufferesh 



NOTES TO THE FIFTH VOLUME. 529' 

fufFereth by fome of thefe monopolies. It bringeth the ge- 
neral profit into a private hand, and the end of all this is 
beggary and bondage to tiie fubjects. We have a law for 
the true and faithful currying of leather: There is a patent 
fets all at liberty notwithftanding that flatute. And to 
"what purpofe is it to do any thing by a6l of parliament, 
when the queen will undo the fame by her prerogative ? 
Out of the fpirit of humiliation, Mr. Speaker, I do fpeak 
it, there is no z£t of her's that hath been or is more dero- 
gatory to her own majefty, more odious to the fubjecl, 
more dangerous to the commonwealth, than the granting 
of thefe monopolies. Mr. Martin faid, I do fpeak for a 
town that grieves and pines, for a country that groaneth 
and languifr.cs, under the burden of monflrous and un- 
confcionable fubftitutes to the monopolitans of Itarch, tin, 
fifh, cloth, oil, vinegar, fait, and I know not what ; nay, 
what not ? The principaleft commodities both of my town 
and country are engroft into the hands of thefe blood- 
fuckers of the commonwealth. If a body, Mr. Speaker, 
being let blood, be left flill languishing without any re- 
medy, how can the good ellate of that body ftill remain } 
Such is the ftate of my town and country •, the trallic is 
taken away, the inward and private commodities are taken 
away, and dare not be ufed without the licence of thefe 
monopolitans. If thefe blood-fuckers be (till let alone to 
fuck up the befl: and principaleft commodities, which the 
earth there hath given us, what will become of us, from 
whom the fruits of our own foil, and the commodities of 
our own labour, which, with the fweat of our brows, even 
up to the knees in mire and dirt, we have laboured for, 
(liall be taken by warrant of fupreme authority, which the 
poor fubje£l dare not gainfay .? Mr. George Moore faid, 
we know the power of her majefty cannot be reftrained by 
any aft : Why therefore (hould we thus talk ? Admit we 
fhould make this ftatute with a Jion objlante i yet the queen 
may grant a patent with a 7ion ohjlaiile^ to crofs this non 
objlante. I think therefore it agreeth more with the gra- 
vity and wifdom of this houfe to proceed with all humble- 
nefs by petition than bill. Mr. Downland faid, as I would 
be no let or overvehement in any thing, fo I am not fot- 
tifti or fenfelefs of the common grievance of the common- 
wealth. If we proceed by way of petition, we can have 
no more gracious anfwer than we had the lafl; parliament 
Vol. V. Mm to 



530 NOTES TO THE FIFTH VOLItME, 

fo our petition. But fince that parliament we have no re- 
formation. Sir Robert Wroth faid, I fpeak, and I fpeafc 
it boldly, thefe patentees are worfe than ever they were. 
Mr. Hnyward Townfcnd propofed, that they Ihould make 
fuit to her mnjefty, not only to repeal ail monopolies griev- 
ous to the ru'oje£t, but alfo that it would pleafe her ma- 
jcfty to give the parliament leave to make an a£l, that they 
might be of no more force, validity, or efFetl, than they 
are at the common law, withotit the flrength of her pre- 
rogative. Which though we might now do, and the a£t 
being fo reafonahle, we might aifiire ourfelves her majefty 
"would not delay the pnfiing thereof, yet we, her loving 
fubjc£ls, &c. would not offer, without her privity and 
confent , the caufe fo nearly toucliing her prerogative), or 
go about to do any fuch a6t:. 

On a fubfcquent day the bill againft monopolies was 
ngain introduced, and Mr. Spicer faid, It is to no purpofe 
to offer to tie her majtilly's hands by a£l of parliament,, 
v/hen flie may loofen herfeif at her pleafure. Mr. Davies 
faid, God hath given that power to abfolute princes which 
he attributes to himfeif. Dixi quod Dii cjl'is. (N. B. This- 
axiom he applies to the kings of England.) Mr. fecretary 
Cecil faid, 1 am fervant to the queen, and before I would 
fpeak and give confent to a cafe that fliouM debafe her 
prerogative, or abridge it, I would wifh that my tongue 
were cut out of my head. I am fure there were law- 
makers before there were laws : (Meaning, I fuppofe, that 
the fovereign was above the laws.) One gentleman went 
about to pofTefs us with the exccu^tion of the law in an 
ancient record of 5 or 7 of Edward the third. Likely 
enough to be true in that time, when the king was afraid 
of the fubje6t. If you fland upon law, and difpute of the 
prerogative, hark ye what Braflon fays, Frttrogativam 
jiojlram nemo attdeat d'lfpntare. And for my own part, I 
like not thcfe eourfes fhould be taken. And you, Mr. 
Speaker, Ihould perform the charge her majefty gave unto 
you in the beginning of this parliament, not to receive 
bills of this nature : For her majelty's ears be open to all 
grievances, and her hands ftretched out to every man's 
petitions. — When the prince difpenfes with a penal law^ 
that is left to the alteration of fovereignty, that is good 
and irrevocable. Mr. Montague faid, I am loth to fpeak 
what I know, left, perhaps, I ftiould difpleafe. The pre- 
rogative 



NOTES TO THE FIFTH VOLUME. 531 

rogative royal is that which is now in queftion, and which 
the laws of the land have ever allowed and maintained. 
Let us therefore «^pply hy petition to her in ijtfty. 

After the fpeaker told the houfe that the queen had an- 
nulled many of the patents, Mr. Francis More faid, I mud 
confefs, Mr. Speaker, I moved the houfe both the lad par- 
liament and this, touching this point; but I never meant 
(and I hope the houfe thinketh fo) to fet limits and bounds 
to the prerogative royal. He proceeds to move, that 
thanks (hould be given to her majelly ; and alfo, that 
whereas divers fpeeches had been moved extravagantly in 
the 'houfe, which doubtlefs have been told lier majelly, 
and perhaps ill conceived of by her, Mr. Speaker would 
apologize, and humbly crave pardon for the fame. N. B, 
Thefe extraiSls were taken by Townfend, a member of the 
houfe, who was no courtier ; and the extravagance of the 
fpeeches feems rather to be on the other fide : It will cer- 
tainly appear llrange to us, that this liberty {hould be 
thought extravagant. However, the queen, notwithfland- 
ing her cajoling the houfe, was fo ill fatisficd with thefe 
proceedings, that flie fpoke of them peeviflily in her con- 
cluding fpeech, and told them that fhe perceived that pri- 
vate refpe£ts with them were privately maflced under pub- 
lic prefence, D'Ewes, p. 619. 

There were fome other topics in favour of prerogative, 
ftill more extravagant, advanced in the houfe this parlia- 
ment. When the queftion of the fubfidy was before them, 
Mr. ferjeant Heyle faid, Mr. Speaker, 1 marvel much that 
the houfe (hould ftand upon granting of a fubfidy or the 
time of payment, when all we have is her majefty's, and 
flic may lawfully at her pleafure take it from us : Yea, fhe 
hath as much right to all our lands and goods as to any 
revenue of her crown. At which all the houfe hemmed, 
and laughed, and talked. Well, quoth ferjeant Heyle, 
all your hemming (hall not put me out of countenance. 
So Mr. Speaker Itood up and faid, It is a great diforder, 
that this houfe (liould be fo ufed. — So the faid ferjeant 
proceeded, and when he had fpokcn a little while, the 
houfe hemmed again ; and fo he fat down. In his latter 
fpeech, he faid, he could prove his former pofition by 
precedents in the time of Henry the third, king John, 
king Stephen, &c. which was the occafion of their hem- 
ming. 13'Ewes, p. 633. It is obfervable, that Heyle was 

M m 2. an 



522 NOTES TO THE FIFTH VOLUME. 

an emhient lawyer, a man of characler. Winwood, vol. 1. 
p. 290.- And though the houfe in general (hewed their 
dirapprobation, no one cared to take him down, or oppofe 
thefe monftrous pofitions. It was alfo afferted this fellion, 
that in the fame manner as the Roman conful was pof- 
feiTed of the power of rejecting or aiimitting motions in 
the fenate, the fpcaker might either admit or rejecSl bills 
in the houfe. D'Ewes, p. 677. The houfe declared 
themfelves againfl this opinion ; but the very propofal of 
it is a proof at what a low ebb liberty was at that time in 
England. 

In the year T591, the judges made a folemn decree, that 
England was an abfolute empire, of which the king was 
the head. In confequence of this opinion, they deter- 
mined that, even if the a£l of the firft of Elizabeth had 
never been made, the king was fupreme head of the 
church ; and might have eredled, by his prei-ogative, fuch 
a court as the ecclefiallical commifTion •, for that he was the 
head of all his fubjecls. Now that court was plainly arbi- 
trary : The inference is, that his power was equally abfo- 
lute over the laity. See Coke's Reports, p. 5. Caudrey's- 
cafe. 



W 



NOTE [MM]", p. 471. 

7"E have remarked before, that Harrifon, in book ih 
chap. II. fays, tliat in tlie reign of Henry Vill. 
there were hanged feventy-two thoufand thieves and rogues 
[befides other inalefaElors)\ this makes about two thoufand 
a year ; But in queen Elizabeth's time, the fame author 
fays, there were only between three and four hundred a 
year hanged for theft and robbery : So much had the times 
mended. But in our age there are not forty a year hanged 
for thofe crimes in all England. Yet Harrifon complains 
of the relaxation of the laws, that there were fo few 
fuch rogues punilhed in his time. Our vulgar prepoflef- 
fion in favour of the morals of former and rude ages is 
very abfurd and ill grounded. The fame author fays, 
chap. TO. that there were computed to be ten thoufand 
gypfies in England •, a fpecies of banditti introduced about 
the reign of Henry VIII. ; and he adds, that there wrU 



NOTES TO THE FIFTH VOLUME. 

be no way of extirpating them ,by the ordinary courfe of 
juftice : The queen muft empluy martial law againll 
them. That race has now almoll totally difappeared in 
England, and even in Scotland, where there were feme 
remains of them a few years ago. However arbitrary 
the exercife of martial law in the crown, it appears that 
nobody in the age of Elizabeth entertained any jealomfy 
of it. 



NOTE [NN], p. 481. 

TlARRISON, in his Defcription of Britaiuy printed in 
^517i ^^^ the follonuing pajfagc^ chap. 13. Certes, 
there is no prince in Europe that hath a more beautiful 
fort of fhips than the queen's majefty of England at this 
prefent ; and thofe generally are of fuch exceeding force, 
that two of them being well appointed and furnifhed as 
they ought, will not let to encounter with three or four 
of them of other countries, and either bowge them or 
put them to flight, if they may not bring them home.— - 
The queen's highnefs hath at this prefent already made 
and furnifhed to the number of one and twenty great fliips, 
which lie for the moft part in Gillingham road. Befide 
thefe, her grace hath other in hand alfo, of whom here- 
after, as their turns do come about, I will not let to leave 
fome farther remembrance. She hath likewife three no- 
table gallies, the Speedwell, the Tryeright, and the Black 
Galley, with the fight whereof, and the reft of the navy- 
royal, it is incredible to fay how marvelloufty her grace is 
delighted ; and not without great caufc, fith by their means 
her coaRs are kept in quiet, and fundry foreign enemies 
put back, which otherwife would invade us. After [peak ^ 
ing of the iner chant Pj'ps, ivhich he fays are commonly eftimated 
at feventeen or eighteen hundred^ he continues. I add, there- 
fore, to the end all men (liould underftand fomewhat of 
the great mnjfes of treaj'ure daily employed upon our navy, 
how there are few of thofe Ihips of the firft and fecond 
fort (that is of the merchant fliips), that being apparelled 
and made ready to fail, are not worth one thoufand pounds, 
or three thoufand ducats at the lead, if they fliould pre- 
fently be fold. What fliall we then think of the navy- 
royal, 



533 



534 NOTES TO THE FIFTH VOLUME. 

royal, of which fome one veflel is worth two of the other, 
3S the fnipwright has often told me ? — It is poffible that 
fome covetous perfon, hearing this report, will either not 
credit at all, or fuppofe money fo employed to be nothing 
profitable to the queen's coffers, as a good hufband faid 
once, when he heard that provifions fliould be made for 
armour, wilhing the queen's money to be rather laid out 
to fome fpeedier return of gain uato her grace : But if he 
will that the good keeping of the fea is the fafeguard of 
our land, he would alter his cenfure, and foon give over 
his judgment. Speaking of the forejis^ this author fays , An 
infinite deal of wood hath been deftroyed within thefe few 
years, and 1 dare affirm, that, if wood do go fo faft to decay 
in the next hundred years of grace, as they have done, or 
are like to do in this, it is to be feared that fea-coal will be 
good merchandize even in the city of London. Harrifon's 
prophecy was fulfilled in a very few years j for about 1615, 
there were two hundred fail employed in carrying coal to 
Loiidon. See Anderfon, vol. i. p. 494. 



NOTE [OO], p. 487. 

LIFE of Burleigh, publiflied by Collins, p. 44. The 
author hints, that this quantity of plate was confidered 
only as fmall in a man of Burleigh's rank. His words are, 
his plate ivas not above fourteen or fifteen thoiifand pounds : 
That he means pound weight is evident. For, by Bur- 
leigh's will, which is annexed to his life, that nobleman 
gives away in legacies, to friends and relations, near four 
thoufand pounds weight, which would have been above 
twelve thoufand pounds fterling in value. The remainder 
he orders to be divided into two equal portions ; the half 
to his eldeft fon and heir ; the other half to be divided 
equally among his fecond fon and three daughters. Were 
we therefore to underftand the whole value of his plate to 
be only fourteen or fifteen thoufand pounds fterling, he lef? 
pot the tenth of it to the heir of his family. 



NOTES TO THE FIFTH VOLUME. 53; 



NOTE rPPJ, p. 488. 

TJjARRISON fays, ** the greateft part of our building 
-*■ ■* " in the cities and good towns of England confillcth 
** only of tinibcr, caft over with thick clay to keep out the 
** wind. Certes, this rude kind of building made the 
*' Spaniards in queen Mary's days to wonder; but chiefly 
*' when they faw that large diet was ufed in many of thefc 
" fo homely cottages, infomuch that one of no fmall re- 
** putation amongft them faid, after this manner ; thefe 
** linglifh, quoth he, have their houfes made of llicks 
** and dirt, but they fare commonly fo well as the king. 
** Whereby it appeareth that he liked better of our good 
*' fare in fuch coarfe cabins, than of their own thin diet 
** in their princely habitations and palaces. The clav with 
** which our houfes are commonly impanelled, is either 
** white, red, or blue." Book ii. chap. 12. The author 
adds, that the new houfes of the nobility are commonly 
of brick or Hone, and that glafs windows were beginning 
to be ufed in England. 



NOTE [ogj, p. 491. 

'T~HE following are the words of Roger Afcham, the 
"■■ queen's preceptor. " It is your {hame (I fpeak to 
" you all, you young gentlemen of England), that one 
*' maid {hould go beyond ye all in excellency of learning, 
*' and knowledge^of divers tongues. Point out fix of the 
" beft given gentlemen of this court, and all they together 
'* (liow not fo much good-will, fpend not fo much time, 
*' bellow not fo many hours daily, orderly, and conftantly, 
** for the increafe of learning and knowledge as doth the 
" queen's majefly herfelf. Yea, I believe that, befides 
*' her perfeft readinefs in Latin, Italian, French, and 
" Spanifh, (he readeth here now at Windfor more Greek 
" every day, than fome prebendary of this church doth 
" Latin in a whole week. — Amongft all the benefits which 
" God had blelll'd me withal, next the knowledge of 
" Chrift's true religion, I count this the greateit, that it 
9 " pleafed 



53^ 



NOTES TO THE FIFTH VOLUME, 

" pleafed God to call me to be one poor minifter in fetting 
*' forward thefe excellent gifts of learning," &c. Page 242, 
Truly, fays Harrifon, it is a rare thing with us now to 
hear of a courtier which hath but his own language ; and 
to fay how many gentlewonaen and ladies there are that, 
befides found knowledge of the Greek and Latin tongues, 
are thereto no kfs Ikilful in the Spanifti, Italian, and 
French, or in fome of them, it refteth not in me, fith I am 
perfuaded, that as the noblemen and gentlemen do fur- 
jnount in this behalf, fo thefe come little or nothing at all 
behind them for their parts •, which induilry God con- 
tinue.— The (Iranger, that entereth in the court of Eng- 
land upon the fudden, (hall rather imagine himfelf to come 
into fome public fchool of the univerfity, where many give 
ear to one that readeth unto them, than into a prince's 
palace, if you confer thus with thofe of other nations, 
Defcription of Britain, book ii. chap. 15. By this account 
the court had profited by the example of the queen. The 
fober way of life pra£lifed by the ladies of Elizabeth's 
court appears fi"om the fame author. Reading, fpinning, 
and needle-work, occupied the elder j mufjc the younger^ 
Id. ibid, 



EKP OF THE FIFTH VOLUME. 



BOSTON PUBLIC LIBRARY 



3 9999 06561 11 



6 



■^*^ 



;'m : : 



;•>- 






!• . • ^^ 



^^ 



